 
  
SUPREME COURT OF CANADA  
 
CITATION : Southwind v. Canada, 
2021 SCC 28    
APPEAL HEARD : 
December  8, 2020  
JUDGMENT RENDERED : 
July 16, 2021  
DOCKET : 38795  
 
BETWEEN : 
Roger Southwind, for himself and on behalf of the  
members of the Lac Seul Band of Indians and Lac Seul First Nation  
Appellants  
 
and 
 
Her Majesty The Queen in Right of Canada  
Respondent  
 
- and - 
 
Attorney General of Saskatchewan, Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs, Tseshaht 
First Nation, Manitoba Keewatinowi Okimakanak Inc., Treaty Land 
Entitlement Committee of Manitoba Inc., Anishinabek Nation, Wauzhushk 
Onigum Nation, Big Grassy First Nation, Onigaming First Nation, 
Naotkamegwanning First Nation, Niisaachew an First Nation, Coalition of the 
Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs, Penticton Indian Band, Williams 
Lake First Nation, Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations, 
Atikameksheng Anishnawbek First Nation, Kwantlen First Nation, Assembly 
of First Natio ns, Assembly of First Nations Quebec -Labrador, Grand Council 
Treaty #3, Mohawk Council of Kahnawà:ke, Elsipogtog First Nation, 
Chemawawin Cree Nation and West Moberly First Nations  
Interveners  
 
CORAM : Wagner  C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Côté, B rown, Rowe, 
Martin and Kasirer  JJ. 
 
  
REASONS FOR 
JUDGMENT :  
(paras.  1 to 147)  Karakatsanis  J. (Wagner  C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Brown, 
Rowe, Martin and Kasirer  JJ. concurring)  
  
DISSENTING 
REASONS :  
(paras.  148 to 194) Côté  J. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE: This document is subject to editorial revision before its reproduction in final 
form in the Canada Supreme Court Reports . 
   
 
   
 SOUTHWIND v. CANADA  
Roger Southwind, for himself  and on behalf of the members  
of the Lac Seul Band of Indians and  
Lac Seul First Nation  Appellants  
v. 
Her Majesty The Queen in Right of Canada  Respondent  
and 
Attorney General of  Saskatchewan,  
Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs,  
Tseshaht First Nation,  
Manitoba Keewatinowi Okimakanak Inc.,  
Treaty Land Entitlement Committee of Manitoba Inc.,  
Anishinabek Nation,  
Wauzhushk Onigum Nation,  
Big Grassy First Nation,  
Onigaming First Nation,  
Naotkamegwanning First Nation,  
Niisaachewan First Nation,  
Coalition of the Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs,  
Penticton Indian Band,  
Williams La ke First Nation,  
Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations,  
Atikameksheng Anishnawbek First Nation,  
Kwantlen First Nation,  
Assembly of First Nations,  
Assembly of First Nations Quebec -Labrador,  
Grand Council Treaty #3,  
Mohawk Council of Kahnawà:ke,  
Elsipog tog First Nation,  
Chemawawin Cree Nation and  
West Moberly First Nations  Interveners   
 Indexed as: Southwind  v. Canada  
2021  SCC  28 
File No.: 38795.  
2020:  December  8; 2021:  July 16. 
Present: Wagner  C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Côté, Brown, Rowe, Martin 
and Kasirer  JJ. 
ON APPEAL  FROM  THE  FEDERAL COURT OF APP EAL 
 Aboriginal law — Fiduciary  duty — Reserve land — Remedy — Equitable 
compensation — Part of First Nation’s reserve land flooded to power hydroelectricity 
generation without consent of First Nation, without compensation and without lawful 
authorization — Claim filed against Canada fo r breach of fiduciary duty and of 
obligations under Indian Act and applicable treaty — Trial judge concluding that 
Canada breached fiduciary duty to First Nation and awarding equitable compensation 
for loss of flooded land — Whether trial judge erred in as sessment of equitable 
compensation.  
 The Lac Seul First Nation (“LSFN”) is a Treaty 3 First Nation in Northern 
Ontario. Its reserve is  located on the southeastern shore of Lac Seul. In 1929, a dam to 
power hydroelectricity generation to Winnipeg was comple ted pursuant to an  
 agreement that Canada, Ontario and Manitoba had entered into. The project involved 
raising the water level of Lac Seul by 10 feet, or approximately 3 metres, to create a 
water reservoir. Canada was aware from the outset that flooding Lac  Seul would cause 
considerable damage to the LSFN’s reserve. Despite repeated warnings about these 
impacts, the project advanced without the consent of the LSFN, without any 
compensation, and without the lawful authorization required. As a result of the pr oject, 
almost one -fifth of the best land on the LSFN reserve was permanently flooded. The 
damage was extensive and included the destruction of homes, wild rice fields, gardens, 
haylands, and gravesites.  
 The LSFN submitted a claim for flooding damages in 1985. In 1991, S, for 
himself and on behalf of the members of the Lac Seul Band of Indians, filed a civil 
claim against Canada in Federal Court for breach of Canada’s fiduciary duty and its 
obligations under the Indian Act  and Treaty 3. The trial judge con cluded that Canada 
failed to meet its fiduciary duty to the LSFN in respect of its reserve land and that the 
appropriate remedy was equitable compensation. The LSFN proposed various models 
of compensation at trial, and led evidence regarding agreements wit h another First 
Nation in contemporaneous hydroelectric projects (“Kananaskis Falls Projects”), 
which the trial judge distinguished. The trial judge valued the flooded land as if it had 
been lawfully expropriated according to general expropriation law. In doing so, he 
excluded the value of the land for hydroelectricity generation. He also assessed other 
calculable losses and non -calculable damages for a total award of  $30,000,000. On 
appeal, the LSFN challenged the trial judge’s evaluation of equitable comp ensation for  
 the loss of the flooded lands. The majority of the Court of Appeal dismissed the appe al. 
A dissenting judge would have allowed the appeal, agreeing that the value calculated 
for the flooded land should have taken into account downstream hydroe lectricity 
generation and concluding that the trial judge also made a legal error in distinguishing 
the Kananaskis Falls Projects.  
 Held (Côté  J. dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed. The award for 
equitable compensation is set aside and returned to the Federal Court for reassessment.  
 Per Wagner C.J. and  Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis , Brown, Rowe, 
Martin and Kasirer  JJ.: Canada breached its obligation to preserve and protect the 
LSFN’s interest in the reserve, which included an obligation to negotia te compensation 
for the LSFN on the basis of the value of the land to the hydroelectricity project. The 
LSFN is entitled to equitable compensation for the lost opportunity to negotiate for an 
agreement reflecting the value of the land to the hydroelectricity generation project.   
 The specific nature  of the Crown’s fiduciary duty to Indigenous Peoples, 
especially over reserve land, informs how equitable compensation must be assessed.  
The Crown’s fiduciary duty is rooted in the obligation of honourable dealing and in the 
overarching goal of reconciliat ion between the Crown and the first inhabitants of 
Canada. The honour of the Crown — and the sui generis  fiduciary duty to which it 
gives rise — is a vital component of the relationship between the Crown and Indigenous  
Peoples. The Crown’s fiduciary duty s tructures the role voluntarily undertaken by the  
 Crown as the intermediary between Indigenous interests in land and the interest of 
settlers.  
 The fiduciary duty itself is shaped by the context to which it applies, which 
means that its content varies with  the nature and the importance of the right being 
protected. A strong fiduciary duty arises where the Crown is exercising control over a 
First Nation’s land. In a case involving reserve land, the sui generis nature of the 
interest in reserve land informs t he fiduciary duty. The importance of the interest in 
reserve land is heightened where it was set aside as part of an obligation that arose out 
of a treaty. The fiduciary duty imposes the following obligations on the Crown: loyalty, 
good faith, full disclos ure, and, where reserve land is involved, the protection and 
preservation of the First Nation’s quasi -proprietary interest from exploitation , 
including exploitation by the Crown itself. In the context of a surrender of reserve land, 
the Court has recognize d that the duty also requires that the Crown protect against 
improvident bargains, manage the process to advance the best interests of the First 
Nation, and ensure that it consent s to the surrender. In an expropriation, the obligation 
to ensure consent is replaced by an obligation to minimally impair the protected 
interest.  
 When the Crown breaches its fiduciary duty, the remedy will seek to 
restore the plaintiff to the position the plaintiff would have been in had the Crown not 
breached its duty. Equitabl e compensation is the preferred remedy when restoring the 
plaintiff’s  assets in specie is not available. It is a discretionary and restitutionary  
 remedy that is assessed rather than precisely calculated. As  its purpose is to make up 
the plaintiff’s loss, i t aims to restore the actual value of the thing lost through the 
fiduciary’s breach, referred to as the plaintiff’s lost opportunity. By restoring the 
beneficiary’s lost opportunity, it deters wrongdoing and enforces the trust at the heart 
of the fiduciary  relationshi p. While equitable compensation is equity’s counterpart to 
common law damages, analogy with common law damages may not be appropriate 
given equity’s purpose, which differs from the purpose of obligations through tort and 
contract.  
 The proper approach to equitable compensation recognizes that the 
applicable rules  will depend both on the nature of the fiduciary relationship and the 
fiduciary obligations. The trial judge must begin by closely analyzing the nature of the 
fiduciary relationship so as to ensure that the loss is assessed in relation to the 
obligations owed by the fiduciary. The loss must be caused in fact by the fiduciary’s 
breach, and the causation analysis is not limited by foreseeability, that is, remotene ss. 
While the fiduciary’s breach must have caused, in fact, the plaintiff’s lost opportunity, 
common law limiting factors developed in legal causation will not readily apply. There 
must be a close relationship between the fiduciary duty and the fiduciary remedy. 
Because equity asse sses the loss at the date of trial and with the benefit of hindsight, it 
compensates the plaintiff for the lost opportunity, regardless of whether the opportunity 
could have been foreseen at the time of the brea ch. The benefit of hindsight means that 
the m ost valuable use of the asset between breach and date of trial is not always  
 foreseeable at the time of brea ch. The assessment of equitable compensation is also 
guided by presumptions that equity makes against breaching fiduciaries.   
 In the instant case, the trial judge’s reasons are tainted by legal errors 
reviewable on a correctness standard. The trial judge erred in concluding that a 
hypothetical expropriation — the minimum statutory obligation — would have fulfilled 
Canada’s fiduciary obligations. This  legal error impacted his assessment of equitable 
compensation because it led him to rely on general principles of expropriation law to 
value the loss and to conclude that compensation would not be assessed at a higher 
value than the minimum required under  an expropriation. The fundamental error of the 
trial judge was that he focused on what Canada would likely have done instead of what 
Canada ought to have done as a fiduciary.  
 The fiduciary duty required more than compensation based upon 
expropriation pri nciples in this case for three reasons. First, the presence of legal 
discretion to take or expropriate the land in the Indian Act  did not define the obligations 
imposed by Canada’s fiduciary duty. The fiduciary duty, not just the Indian Act , 
imposed substa ntive  obligations on how Canada was to exercise its discretion over the 
reserve land. The provisions in the Indian Act  accommodated the exercise of the 
Crown’s fiduciary duty by recognizing the discretion of the Crown to negotiate, or the 
discretion of the  Governor in Council to determine the terms of a taking or 
expropriation. There was therefore no conflict between the requirements of the Indian 
Act and the requirements imposed by the fiduciary duty. The equitable presumption of  
 legality or lawfulness, wh ich prevents breaching fiduciaries from reducing 
compensation by arguing that they would not have complied with the law, is of little 
assistance in determining either the fiduciary obligatio ns or the assessment of loss . The 
presumption cannot be inverted a nd used to limit compensation by suggesting that the 
fiduciary is expected to do no more than what the law, not equity, requires. Moreover, 
Canada’s legal powers to expropriate cannot be considered  as a factor to limit 
compensation. Canada is not permitted to benefit from the very discretionary power 
over the LSFN which is the source of its fiduciary duty.  
 Second, the fiduciary duty required more than compensation based upon 
expropriation principle s because the fact that the land was required for a public work 
did not negate the obligations imposed by Canada’s fiduciary duty. The fiduciary duty 
continues to apply even if the land is needed for a public work. While the Crown can 
decide that a public work is in the public interest and should thus proceed, the manner 
in which it proceeds is subject to the fiduciary duty.   
 Third, the fiduciary duty required more than compensation based upon 
expropriation principles because the principles of expropriatio n law are fundamentally 
different than those underlying Indigenous interest in land. Expropriation law is not the 
appropriate legal framework governing historic breaches of the Crown’s fiduciary  duty 
to protect a First Nation’s interest in reserve land. Th e fiduciary obligations in this case 
must reflect the nature of the interest, the impact of the loss on the First Nation, the 
importance of the relationship, and reconciliation, which is the overarching goal of the  
 fiduciary duty itself, based in the honou r of the Crown. In the context of an 
expropriation or taking, the Crown is required to minimally impair the protected 
interest. Where the Crown decides that reserve land is necessary for a public work and 
takes that land without the consent of the First Na tion, the fiduciary duty requires the 
Crown to seriously consider the impact on the First Nation and how best to minimize 
that impact. As a fiduciary, the Crown has the duty to preserve the First Nation’s 
quasi -proprietary interest in the land as much as p ossible and to ensure fair 
compensation reflecting the sui generis interest.  
 The duty to preserve the interest to the greatest extent possible is not met 
if expropriation principles are applied in this case. Even though the expropriation value 
considers the highest and best use of the land at the time of expropriation, this generally 
does not include the value of the land to the scheme itself because expropriation law 
seeks to provide landowners with the compensation necessary to purchase replacement 
land. Conversely, sui generis Indigenous interests in land are fundamentally different 
as reserve land is not a fungible commodity and Indigenous interests in land are at the 
centre of the relationship between the Crown and Indigenous Peoples. Instead, given 
the LSFN’s sui generis interest in the reserve land and the impact on the LSFN, the 
duty required Canada to capture the full potential value of the land for the land’s 
intended use, notwithstanding its legal power to expropriate. Canada must always keep 
the First Nation informed, attempt to negotiate a surrender before proceeding to an 
expropriation, and ensure compensation reflecting the nature of the interest and the 
impact on the community.   
  Canada ought to have first attempted to negotiate a surrender. Canada’s 
fiduciary obligations required it to ensure the highest compensation possible, including 
compensation for the land’s anticipated use as land for hydroelectricity generation. If 
negotiations for a surrender of the land were unsuccessful, Canada cou ld have 
proceeded through a taking or expropriation, but even in an expropriation , Canada was 
required to preserve the LSFN’s interest in the land to the greatest extent possible and 
should have secured compensation for the LSFN that reflected the nature o f the interest, 
the impact on the community, and the value of the land to the project.  
 The lost opportunity in this case is the opportunity to negotiate a surrender 
reflecting the highest value of the land, which was its use for hydroelectricity 
generatio n: the LSFN is entitled to compensation for that lost opportunity. The 
valuation of the LSFN’s lost opportunity must reflect Canada’s obligation to negotiate 
compensation based upon the best price that could have been obtained for the land’s 
use for hydroe lectricity generation.  In this case, the presumption of highest and best 
use means that the land should be valued on the basis of its actual use as flooded land 
for hydroelectricity generation and allows equitable compensation to focus on a 
successful nego tiated surrender because that more clearly aligns with the nature of the 
breach, which included a failure to keep the LSFN informed and a failure to prevent 
the project from proceeding until the negotiations for compensation had been resolved. 
Equity can p resume that the LSFN would have consented to a negotiated settlement at 
the best price the Crown could have realistically obtained at the time. The value of the 
flooded land must be reassessed.   
  Per Côté  J. (dissenting): There is no basis to interfere wit h the trial judge’s 
equitable compensation assessment. The trial judge assessed compensation for the 
value of the flooded lands in 1929 based on a thorough examination of the facts as 
established in the record. As there is no reviewable error in the trial judge’s analysis, 
the appeal should be dismissed.  
 S and the LSFN have not established a basis for interfering with the trial 
judge’s valuation. The trial judge’s determination that the LSFN should have been 
compensated through  a one -time payment in 1929 based on an expropriation model is 
not an extricable error, and thus not reviewable on a correctness standard. The trial 
judge’s findings regarding what would have actually happened in 1929 had Canada not 
breached its duty to the LSFN are factual determina tions, not legal ones. No particular 
findings of fact by the trial judge have been identified as constituting a palpable and 
overriding error.  
 The trial judge made no reviewable errors. The trial judge applied settled 
principles of equitable compensation,  including the special importance of its deterrent 
effect in furthering the ongoing project of reconciliation between Canada and 
Indigenous peoples. He looked back to when the breach occurred, and, with the benefit  
of hindsight and the evidentiary record, assessed what position the LSFN would have 
been in but for the brea ch. He determined that, had Canada acted legally, it would have 
taken the reserve lands in 1929 through expropriation or surrender. Based on the  
 evidence before him, the trial judge assessed the losses presuming the highest and best 
use and with the benefit of  hindsight.  
 While there is agreement with the majority that equitable compensation in 
this case should be assessed on the basis of a negotiated surrender, there is disagreement 
with the majority’s view that the lost opportunity equates to a lost opportun ity to 
negotiate a surrender of the lands for hydroelectricity generation. The value  of the 
compensation that Canada should have negotiated for the LSFN cannot be assessed in 
an evidentiary or factual vacuum and the majority seeks to impose a greater oblig ation 
on a trial judge than the law demands. The majority’s characterization presupposes that 
the trial judge had the requisite factual basis to make such a finding, while it is clear 
from the record that he did not. At trial, no evidence was provided rega rding a one -time 
payment for the flooded lands for hydroelectric purposes. S and the LSFN must bear 
the consequences of their trial strategy, even though they have changed tack on 
appe al. Therefore, the trial judge was correct to find that the argument tha t Canada 
could, and should, have paid more than fair market value for the lands was nothing 
more than optimistic speculation.  
 The trial judge’s determination regarding the comparability of the 
Kananaskis Falls Projects and the Lac Seul situation is a fac tual determination. His 
finding that the Kananaskis Falls Projects were not a relevant proxy was supported by 
the limited evidence before him. That evidence does not substantiate a finding that he 
made a palpable and overriding error in refusing to award a  sum in excess of the fair  
 market value of the lands. It is simply speculation to conclude that Canada’s differing 
approach for the Kananaskis Falls Projects leads to the conclusion that it breached its 
duty in this case.  
 Moreover, the trial judge’s incl usion of a robust non -calculable loss 
analysis allowed him to meaningfully consider the impact of the flooding on the LSFN. 
He appropriately acknowledged and incorporated the impact on the community and the 
LSFN’s perspective in his analysis. The total equ itable compensation awarded ensures 
that S and the LSFN are compensated for the value of the lands.  
Cases Cited  
By Karakatsanis  J. 
 Applied:  Guerin v. The Queen , [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335; Osoyoos Indian Band 
v. Oliver (Town) , 2001 SCC 85, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 746; Housen v. Nikolaisen , 2002 SCC 
33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235; distinguished: Wewaykum Indian Band v. Canada , 2002 SCC 
79, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 245; considered: Canson Enterprises Ltd. v. Boughton & Co. , 
[1991] 3 S.C.R. 534; referred to:  Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of 
Forests) , 2004 SCC 73, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 511; R. v. Desautel , 2021 SCC 17; Beckman 
v. Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation , 2010 SCC 53, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 103; R. v. 
Sparrow , [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075; Manitoba Metis Federation Inc. v. Canada ( Attorney 
General) , 2013 SCC 14, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 623; R. v. Van der Peet , [1996] 2 S.C.R. 507; 
Williams Lake Indian Band v. Canada (Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development) ,  
 2018 SCC 4, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 83; Ermineskin  Indian Band and Nation v. Canada , 2009 
SCC 9, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 222; Blueberry River Indian Band v. Canada (Department of 
Indian Affairs and Northern Development) , [1995] 4 S.C.R. 344; Re Dawson; Union 
Fidelity Trustee Co. v. Perpetual Trustee Co. (1966), 84 W.N. (Pt.  1) (N.S.W.) 399 ; 
Hodgkins on v. Simms , [1994] 3 S.C.R. 377; Whitefish Lake Band of Indians v. Canada 
(Attorney General) , 2007 ONCA 744, 87 O.R. (3d) 321; Stirrett v. Cheema , 2020 
ONCA 288, 150 O.R. (3d) 561; AIB Group (UK) plc v. Mark Redler & Co. Solicitors , 
[2014] UKSC 58, [2015] A.C. 1503; Cadbury Schweppes Inc. v. FBI Foods Ltd. , 
[1999] 1 S.C.R. 142; Target Holdings Ltd. v. Redferns , [1996] 1 A.C. 421; Brickenden 
v. London Loan & Savings Co. , [1934] 3 D.L.R. 465 . 
By Côté  J. (dissenting)  
 Housen v. Nikolaise n, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235; Whitefish Lake 
Band of Indians v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2007 ONCA 744, 87 O.R. (3d) 321; 
Guerin v. The Queen , [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335; Modern Cleaning Concept Inc. v. Comité 
paritaire de l’entretien d’édifices publics de la r égion de Québec , 2019 SCC 28, [2019] 
2 S.C.R. 406; Nelson (City) v. Mowatt , 2017 SCC 8, [2017] 1 S.C.R. 138; Mahjoub v. 
Canada (Citizenship and Immigration) , 2017 FCA 157, [2018] 2 F.C.R. 344; 
Hodgkinson v. Simms , [1994] 3 S.C.R. 377; National Westm inster Bank plc v. Morgan , 
[1985] 1 All E.R. 821 . 
Statutes and Regulations Cite d  
 Constitution Act , 1982 , s. 35. 
Expropriation Act , R.S.C. 1985, c.  E-21. 
Expropriations Act , R.S.O. 1990, c.  E.26.  
Indian Act , R.S. C. 1927, c.  98, ss. 48, 50, 51 . 
Royal Proclamation, 1763  (G.B.), 3 Geo. 3 [reproduced in R.S.C. 1985, A pp. II, No. 1]. 
Unemployment Relief Act, 193 0, S.C.  1930, c. 1. 
Treaties and  Agreements  
Treaty No. 3 (1873).  
Authors Cited  
Bray,  Samuel  L. “Fiduciary Remedies”, in  Evan  J. Criddle, Paul  B. Miller and Robert 
H. Stikoff, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Fiduciary Law . New York : Oxford 
University Press, 2019, 449.  
Luk, Senwung. “Not So Many Hats: The Crown’s Fiduciary Obligations to Aboriginal 
Communities since Guerin ” (2013), 76 Sask. L. Rev.  1. 
Mainville, Robert. An Overview of Aboriginal and Treaty Rights and Compensation 
for Their Brea ch. Saskatoon: Purich Publishing, 2001.  
McCabe,  J. Timothy S. The Honour of the Crown and its Fiduciary Duties to 
Aboriginal Peoples . Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis,  2008.  
Oosterhoff on Trusts: Text, Commentary and Materials , 9th ed. by Albert  H. 
Oosterhof f, Robert  Chambers and Mitchell McInnes. Toronto: Carswell, 2019.  
Rotman,  Leonard  I. Fiduciary Law . Toronto: Thomson/Carswell, 2005.  
Rotman,  Leonard  I. “Understanding Fiduciary Duties and Relationship Fiduciarity” 
(2017), 62 McGill L.J.  975. 
Slattery, Brian. “The Aboriginal Constitution” (2014), 67 S.C.L.R.  (2d) 319.   
  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal  (Nadon, Webb 
and Gleason JJ.A.), 2019 FCA 171 , [2020] 1 F.C.R. 745 , 89 C.L.R. (4th) 1, 15 L.C.R. 
(2d) 99, [2019] F.C.J No. 672 (QL), 2019 CarswellNat 2362 (WL Can.), affirming a 
decision of Zinn J., 2017 FC 906, 74 C.L.R. (4th) 4, [2018] 4 C.N.L.R. 63, 6 L.C.R. 
(2d) 73, [2017] F.C.J. No. 966 (QL), 2017 CarswellNat 5620  (WL Can.). Appeal  
allowed, Côté J. dissenting.  
 Rosanne Kyle  and Elin Sigurdson , for the appellant s. 
 Christopher Rupar  and Michael Roach , for the respondent.  
 P. Mitch McAdam , Q.C. , for the intervener the Attorney General of 
Saskatchewan.  
 Carly Fox , for the intervener the Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs.  
 Christopher  Devlin , for the intervener the Tseshaht First Nation.  
 Kate Kempton , for the intervener  Manit oba Keewatinowi Okimakanak Inc. 
 Harley Schachter , for the intervener the Treaty Land Entitlement 
Committee of Manitoba Inc.  
 Cynthia Westaway , for the intervener the Anishinabek Nation.   
  David  G. Leitch , for the intervener the Wauzhushk Onigum Nation.  
 Donald  R. Colborne , for the i ntervener s the  Big Grassy First Nation, the 
Onigaming First Nation, the Naotkamegwanning First Nation and  the Niisaachewan 
First Nation.  
 Peter Millerd , for the intervener s the  Coalition of the Union of British 
Columbia Indian Chiefs,  the Penticton Indian Band and the Williams Lake First Nation.  
 Ronald  S. Maurice , for the intervener the Federation of Sovereign 
Indigenous Nations.  
 Steven  W. Carey , for the intervener the Atikameksheng Anishnawbek First 
Nation.  
 Tim Dickson , for the interve ner the Kwantlen First Nation.  
 Stuart Wuttke , for the intervener the Assembly of First Nations.  
 Beno ît Amyot , for the intervener the Assembly of First Nations 
Quebec -Labrador.  
 Kate Gunn , for the intervener the Grand Council Treaty #3.   
  Stacey Douglas , for the intervener the Mohawk Council of Kahnawà:ke.  
 Alisa  R. Lombard , for the intervener the Elsipogtog First Nation.  
 Catherine  J. Boies Parker , Q.C. , for the intervener  the Chemawawin Cree 
Nation.  
 Reidar  M. Mogerman , Q.C. , for the intervener the West Moberly First 
Nations.  
 
The judgment of Wagner  C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Brown, Rowe, 
Martin and Kasirer  JJ. was delivered by  
 
 KARAKATSANIS J. —  
[1] At the beginning of the twentieth century, Canada needed more electricity 
to fuel Winnipeg’s economic growth. The governments of Canada, Manitoba, and 
Ontario decided to create a water reservoir in northern Ontario to power 
hydroelectricity generation. They settled on Lac Seul, which flows into both Ontario 
and Manitoba, and determined that if the y raised the water level of Lac Seul by 10 feet, 
or approximately 3 metres, they could generate substantial electricity. Construction of 
the dam was completed in 1929 and the water steadily rose through the 1930s. The 
project was a success for the three go vernments.   
 [2] The project was also a tragedy for the Lac Seul First Nation (LSFN). The 
LSFN’s reserve (Reserve) is located on the southeastern shore of Lac Seul. Almost one -
fifth of its best land was flooded and its members were “deprived of their livelihood,  
robbed of their natural resources, and driven out of their home [s]” ( 2017 FC 906, 
[2018] 4 C.N.L.R. 63,  at para.  156).  
[3] Canada was aware from the outset that flooding Lac Seul by 10 feet would 
cause “very considerable” damage to the Reserve. In the late 19 20s, the Supervisor 
responsible for valuing the loss warned that the Reserve would be “ruined for any 
purpose [for] which it was set aside”, that the members of the First Nation were 
“helpless to avert this calamity”, and that they viewed their future “wit h utter dismay” 
(Trial Reasons, at paras.  152 and 156).  
[4] Despite repeated warnings from government officials about the impact that 
the project would have on the First Nation, the project advanced without the consent of 
the Lac Seul First Nation, without any  compensation, and without the lawful 
authorization required.   
[5]  Since the Royal Proclamation, 1763  (G.B.), 3 Geo. 3 (reproduced in 
R.S.C. 1985, App.  II, No.  1), Indigenous interests in land, including reserve land, 
cannot be taken or used without legal aut horization from the Crown. The Indian Act , 
R.S.C. 1927, c.  98, permitted expropriation for public works, but only with the approval 
of Cabinet through the Governor in Council. Treaty No.  3 (1873), that set aside the 
reserve land for the LSFN, required “due  compensation” for any taking or  
 appropriation. In addition, this Court recognized in Guerin v. The Queen , [1984] 2 
S.C.R. 335, and subsequent decisions,  that the Crown is subject to a fiduciary duty 
when it exercises control over Indigenous interests. Thi s fiduciary duty imposes strict 
obligations on the Crown to advance the best interests of Indigenous Peoples.  
[6] The trial judge concluded that Canada failed to meet its fiduciary duty to 
the Lac Seul First Nation in respect of its interest in Reserve land. On appeal, Canada 
does not dispute this conclusion.  
[7] Canada did not keep the LSFN informed about the project; did not consult 
the LSFN; did not negotiate on t he L SFN’s behalf to get the best compensation 
possible; did not use its power to refuse to authorize the project until the other parties 
agreed to fair compensation; and the compensation Canada did manage to negotiate — 
14 years after the flooding began — was in adequate. This was unlawful and egregious 
conduct, even by the standards of the time. As the trial judge observed, this outcome 
was “inexplicable” (para. 298).  
[8] The results of Canada’s failures are tragic and well documented. Roughly 
17 percent of the Rese rve — 11,304 acres or approximately 4,575 hectares — is now 
permanently flooded. Homes were destroyed, as were wild rice fields, gardens, 
haylands, and gravesites. Fishing, hunting, and trapping were all impacted. The LSFN 
was separated because one part of  the Reserve became an island. And, despite the 
sacrifices suffered by the LSFN to make the hydroelectricity project possible, the 
Reserve was not provided with electricity until the 1980s.   
 [9] The LSFN challenges the trial judge’s evaluation of equitable 
comp ensation for the loss of the flooded lands. The issue for this Court is how to assess 
equitable compensation for the loss caused by Canada’s breach of fiduciary duty. The 
central inquiry is: what position would the beneficiary be in had the fiduciary fulfi lled 
its obligations?  
[10] The trial judge valued the flooded land based on its value in 1929, with 
10 percent valued as waterfront land and 90  percent valued as bushland. He determined 
that because Canada was authorized to expropriate the land for a public wo rk under the 
Indian Act  provisions in force at the time, the land should be valued based upon an 
expropriation in 1929. Thus, the trial judge concluded that the First Nation was not 
entitled to be compensated for any value that the land provided to the hyd roelectricity 
project itself.  
[11] In my view, this approach to equitable compensation for breach of 
fiduciary duty is flawed. By looking solely at the amount the LSFN would have 
received if Canada had complied with the general law relating to expropriation, th e trial 
judge gave no effect to the unique obligations imposed by the fiduciary duty. The trial 
judge improperly focused on what Canada would likely  have done , as opposed to what 
Canada ought to have done  as a fiduciary.  While I agree with much of the tria l judge’s 
analysis, this error tainted his assessment of equitable compensation.   
[12] The fiduciary duty imposes heavy obligations on Canada. The duty does 
not melt away when Canada has competing priorities. Canada was under an obligation  
 to preserve and prote ct the LSFN’s interest in the Reserve. This included an obligation 
to negotiate compensation for the LSFN on the basis of the value of the land to the 
hydroelectricity project. Compensation must be assessed on that basis.  
[13] I would allow the appeal and remit  the case back to the Federal Court for 
reassessment of the equitable compensation to include the value of the flooded land to 
the hydroelectricity project.  
I. Background  
[14] The LSFN is a Treaty 3 First Nation in Northern Ontario. The members are 
Anishinaabe peo ple. According to Chief Clifford Bull, they have always been lake 
dwellers who travelled through the water, kept their homes and gardens near the water, 
cultivated wild rice in the water, fished in the water, and hunted near the water.  
[15] The LSFN’s tradition al territory extends from the Trout Lake region in 
northwestern Ontario, southeast through the Lac Seul region, and northeast towards 
Lake St. Joseph. The LSFN has one Reserve, called the Lac Seul Indian Reserve 
No. 28, which is located on the southeastern  shore of Lac Seul in northern Ontario. The 
Reserve has three communities — Kejick Bay, Whitefish Bay, and Frenchman’s Head.  
[16] The Reserve was created under Treaty 3, which required Canada to select 
and set aside reserves that would be “most convenient and a dvantageous for each band 
or bands of Indians”. In 1875, the LSFN chose Lac Seul as the site of the Reserve  
 because of the resources along the shoreline and the social, cultural, and spiritual 
importance of the area.   
[17] In the early twentieth century, Canad a wanted to provide more electricity 
to Winnipeg. By 1911, Canada identified Lac Seul as a potential reservoir for 
hydroelectricity generation (Project). Lac Seul flows into the English River in Ontario, 
which in turn flows into the Winnipeg River in Manit oba. In 1915, the Dominion Water 
Power Branch, within the Department of the Interior, prepared a report noting that a 
10 foot flooding of Lac Seul would increase the power potential on the English River 
by 233 percent.  
[18] In the same year, the Manitoba Hydro graphic Survey began preliminary 
fieldwork. Chief John Akewance of the LSFN first became aware of the potential 
Project through the fieldwork, and wrote to Indian Agent R.  S. McKenzie in 1915 
outlining his concerns. Canada advised the Indian Agent that “th ere is no present 
intention to raise the waters of Lac Seul” (Trial Reasons, at para.  127).  
[19] The fieldwork report was released in 1916 and noted that the Project would 
flood portions of the Reserve. In 1917, Canada recommended to Ontario that it obtain 
flowage rights over the land that would need to be flooded. In 1919, Canada informed 
itself about the procedure for granting flowage rights on reserve land:  
If after negotiation the offer is accepted on behalf of the Indians, or 
amended and so accepted, the am ount of compensation agreed upon is  
 deposited with the Minister of Finance for the use of the band of Indians 
and the land is surrendered.  
 
(Trial Reasons, at para.  132) 
Canada wrote to Ontario again in 1921 urging that they reserve the flooding rights. 
There is no record of a response.  
[20] In 1924, Chief Paul Thomas met with Indian Agent Frank Edwards to 
express the LSFN’s concerns. Agent Edwards told Chief Thomas that Canad a would 
“protect their interests as far as possible ” (Trial Reasons, at para.  137 (emphasis in 
original)).  
[21] In February 1928, Canada, Ontario, and Manitoba entered into the Lac Seul 
Storage Agreement which governed the construction and ownership of the Pro ject. The 
agreement apportioned the capital costs among the governments, which included “the 
cost of acquiring flooding privileges or other necessary easements” and “compensation 
for timber, buildings and improvements, including Ontario Crown Lands, Indian  Lands 
and lands owned by private individuals” (Trial Reasons, at para.  147).  
[22] In April 1928, Ontario wrote to affected landowners regarding the Project. 
Ontario also notified the Department of Indian Affairs and indicated that the water 
levels would be rai sed by approximately 12 feet. In the summer of 1928, H.  J. Bury, 
the Supervisor of Indian Timber Lands, appraised the value of the LSFN’s anticipated 
losses at $120,200. Ontario disagreed with the estimate. Mr. Bury reiterated his position  
 in two internal memoranda. On May 14, 1929, he wrote that “[t]he reserve is ruined for 
any purpose [for] which it was set aside . . . for the Indians” (Trial Reasons, at 
para.  156). Two days later, he wrote:  
There are 688 Indians on the reserve, who are helpless to avert this 
calamity, and who view the future with utter dismay, but I feel that the 
associated governments concerned, will not permit these Indians to be 
deprived of their livelihood, robbed of their natural resources, and driven 
out of their home[s], without no t only allowing them generous monetary 
compensation, but also make provision, during the period of years in which 
they will have to re -adjust themselves to new and strange conditions, for 
exclusive trapping rights for them in a district remote from civiliz ation.  
 
(Trial Reasons, para.  156) 
[23] On May 17, 1929, the Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs 
wrote to his superior that “[t]he situation is certainly serious; and hardship and disaster 
appear to face these poor Indians unless some arrangement is  made at once, providing 
for reasonable compensation and the allocation of suitable hunting and fishing grounds 
elsewhere” (Trial Reasons, at para.  157). No agreement regarding compensation to the 
LSFN was reached with Ontario.  
[24] Ontario applied for necessar y approvals in July 1928. The application 
noted that “[i]t will be necessary in connection with the proposed work to acquire 
flowage rights over lands on an Indian Reserve” (Trial Reasons, at para.  159 (emphasis 
deleted)). Even though those rights were nev er acquired, the dam was completed by 
June 1929. The power site, the Ear Falls Generating Station, was completed and began 
delivering power in February 1930.   
 [25] The flooding of Lac Seul was delayed by disagreements between Canada 
and Ontario regarding timber clearing. Ontario wanted to harvest its Crown timber prior 
to flooding. To resolve the impasse, Canada proposed that the timber clearing could be 
accomplished as an unemployment project under Canada’s depression -era 
Unemployment Relief Act, 1930 , S.C.  1930 , c. 1. As negotiations for this relief project 
unfolded, Canada assured the LSFN’s members that “ their interests will be protected 
to the fullest possible extent ” (Trial Reasons, at para.  181 (emphasis in original)).  
[26] In July 1933, Canada’s Minister of th e Interior signed the agreement for 
the relief project. A week later, the local Indian Agent and the timber supervisor assured 
the LSFN that the water would not be raised “for several years to come” (Trial Reasons, 
at para.  183). The relief project was a f ailure. Less than 700 acres were cleared at a cost 
of over $850,000 to Canada. Members of the LSFN were excluded from employment 
in the project.  
[27] Despite the assurances given to the LSFN, the waters of Lac Seul began to 
rise in 1934. The damage was extensi ve. Agent Edwards estimated that at least 
29 houses would need to be rebuilt — in total, one -quarter to one -third of the houses 
ultimately had to be moved or replaced. Between 1935 and 1939, additional damage 
was documented. In August 1936, Canada’s Superi ntendent General of Indian Affairs 
wrote to Ontario’s Minister of Lands and Forests:  
. . . the Lac Seul Indian Reserve has been flooded to such a serious extent 
that we have been compelled already to construct many new houses for the 
Indians at a cost of $ 25,000 and the flood conditions have not only  
 submerged the Indian hay lands, gardens and cultivated land, but have also 
seriously impaired the efforts of these Indians to earn their livelihood.  
 
. . . The Indians of this Reserve have been definitely assur ed that their 
interests would be fully protected and they are at present much disturbed 
and alarmed at the damage already caused. [Emphasis deleted.]  
 
(Trial Reasons, at para.  192) 
[28] In March 1937, Mr. Bury wrote a memorandum regarding the ongoing 
failure to  provide compensation. He wrote:  
I desire to again draw your attention to the serious breach of faith that our 
Department has made with the Indians of the Lac Seul Reserve, respecting 
promises made to them regarding flooding compensation . . .  
 
. . . 
 
I consider that these Indians have been very shabbily treated. Their Reserve 
lands, timber, houses, gardens, rice beds, musk -rat swamps have been 
flooded now for some years, and we still procrastinate[.] [I]f it had been a 
white settlement, no person would hav e dared to flood the property, 
without paying compensation before flooding took place. [Emphasis 
deleted.]  
 
(Trial Reasons, at para.  194) 
[29] Negotiations between Canada and Ontario continued. In 1940, Ontario 
determined that $50,000 would be a “fair valuation ” of compensation, but Ontario also 
claimed it was owed compensation for what it viewed as excess acres on the Reserve 
as well as outstanding claims for timber clearing. The LSFN was not consulted nor 
informed of the impending settlement.   
 [30] In 1943, Canada and Ontario finally agreed to a claim amount of $72,539, 
with deductions of $5,000 to pay a timber claim submitted by a lumber company and 
$17,276 to pay Ontario for “excess acres” on the Reserve. The balance, $50,263, was 
deposited into th e LSFN’s trust account on November 17, 1943.  
[31] By contrast, Ontario and Canada negotiated compensation with other non -
Indigenous groups whose property fell within the flood plain of the dam project, such 
as the Anglican Church Missionary Society, the Hudson ’s Bay Company, and the 
Canadian National Railway. For instance, the Anglican Church Missionary Society 
received compensation for the timber destroyed in the floods and for the costs of 
relocating its church and cemetery. Similarly, the Hudson’s Bay Compan y engaged in 
protracted negotiations with the federal government that resulted in compensation not 
only for “Flowage Rights” over the company’s territory, but also for the value of the 
buildings and other facilities.  
[32] Canada’s conduct towards the LSFN also differs from its conduct in three 
earlier projects that impacted another First Nation. In the early 1910s, Calgary Power 
and Transmission sought permission from Indian Affairs to flood reserve lands of the 
Stoney Indian Band in Alberta for three hydroelect ricity projects (Kananaskis Falls 
Projects). For all three projects, Canada negotiated a surrender on behalf of the First 
Nation and insisted on compensation reflecting the value of the land to hydroelectricity 
generation. Calgary Power entered into three agreements which provided two forms of  
 compensation: a one -time payment for flooded land and a yearly water power rental 
agreement. This compensation was based upon the value of the land to the project.  
[33] Here, there was never a negotiated surrender of the l and by the LSFN and 
Canada did not at any point expropriate the land in accordance with the provisions of 
the Indian Act . Nonetheless, the Project was completed in 1929 and the lands were 
steadily flooded throughout the 1930s. A total of 11,304 acres, appr oximately 
17 percent of the Reserve, is now flooded. The flooding destroyed wild rice fields, 
gardens, and haylands for livestock. It impacted fishing and damaged homes, 
campsites, and shoreline infrastructure. The flooding damaged and exposed graves that 
were not relocated prior to the flooding. One of the LSFN’s communities, Kejick Bay, 
became an island separated from the other communities.  
[34] In September 1985, the LSFN submitted a claim for flooding damages to 
the Specific Claims Branch of the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. 
In 1991, Roger Southwind, for himself and on behalf of the members of the Lac Seul 
Band of Indians, filed a civil claim against Canada. In November 2006, 63 years after 
the settlement, the LSFN entered into an agreeme nt with Ontario Power Generation 
(OPG), the current operator of the Ear Falls Generating Station. The agreement 
included $11,200,000 in compensation for losses arising from the Ear Falls Generating 
Station on the LSFN’s traditional territory, but expressly  excluded damages caused by 
the flooding in the 1930s. The settlement included a plan to open a new generating 
station and provided the LSFN with the opportunity to purchase an equity position of  
 25 percent. In February 2009, OPG opened the new generating station in partnership 
with the First Nation. In  2009, a causeway was built to finally reconnect Kejick Bay 
Island and the Reserve mainland. The LSFN contributed $1,750,000 to this and a 
related project.  
A. Trial Decision , 2017 FC 906, [2018] 4 C.N.L.R. 63  (Zinn J.)  
[35] In 1991, Roger Southwind, for himself and on behalf of the members of 
the Lac Seul Band of Indians , filed a civil claim against Canada in Federal Court for 
breach of Canada’s fiduciary duty and its obligations under the Indian Act  and Treaty  3. 
The trial, which lasted more than 50 days, began before Justice Zinn in September 
2016.  
[36] The parties called 24 witnesses, 22 of whom were expert witnesses whose 
testimony included how to value the loss and bring that loss forward to present value. 
The plaint iff proposed various models for assessing compensation, including a 
revenue -sharing agreement, the loss of revenues from traditional activities, and a land 
lease. The plaintiff also led evidence regarding Canada’s arrangements with another 
First Nation in contemporaneous hydroelectricity projects. Both parties called expert 
witnesses to testify about different models for translating historic losses into present 
value.  
[37] The trial judge held that Canada owed the LSFN a fiduciary duty in respect 
of land reserv ed for its benefit under Treaty 3. He particularized the following  
 obligations: a duty of loyalty and good faith in the discharge of its mandate as a trustee 
of the Reserve land; a duty to provide full disclosure and consult with the band; a duty 
to act wi th ordinary prudence with a view to the best interests of the LSFN; and a duty 
to protect and preserve the band’s proprietary interests in the Reserve from exploitation 
(para.  226). The trial judge found that Canada breached each of these obligations.  
[38] Canada accepted that equitable compensation was the appropriate remedy 
for breach of fiduciary duty. The trial judge summarized the principles of equitable 
compensation as follows: (1) the goal of equitable compensation is to restore what the 
plaintiff has lo st due to the breach; (2) the plaintiff’s loss is an opportunity that was not 
realized because of the breach; (3) the plaintiff’s loss must be assessed with the benefit 
of hindsight and not based on what was foreseeable or known at the date of the breach; 
(4) the losses are to be determined on a common sense view of causation; (5) the court 
must assume the plaintiff would have made the most favourable use of the trust 
property; and (6) the court must assume that the defendant would have carried out its 
duties in a lawful manner (para. 285).  
[39] In applying these principles, the trial judge focused on what would have 
happened had Canada not breached its duties. He determined that the Project was a 
public work and it would have been completed. Opposition from the LSFN or the 
Indian Affairs branch would likely not have stopped the Project. Indeed, the trial judge 
found that Canada could have legally taken the lands without the LSFN’s consent 
through expropriation. The trial judge determined that it was unlikely that  the LSFN  
 could have negotiated a revenue -sharing agreement. He distinguished agreements 
reached with a First Nation in earlier hydroelectricity projects, which included both a 
one-time payment and annual rent, on the bases that the hydroelectricity genera ting 
stations were located on the reserves rather than downstream and the utility company 
in the earlier projects had no authority to expropriate the land, but Canada did have that 
authority in this Project.  
[40] In light of these findings, the trial judge det ermined that Canada would 
have likely obtained a negotiated settlement for a flowage easement or expropriated the 
land for the limited purpose of facilitating the Project. He assessed the market value of 
the flooded land based upon a hypothetical flowage e asement, valued as if it had been 
lawfully expropriated according to general expropriation law. In doing so, the trial 
judge rejected expert opinion seeking to incorporate the value of the land for 
hydroelectricity generation, reasoning that any value “att ributable to the project” was 
to be excluded under both the Expropriation Act , R.S.C. 1985, c. E -21, and the 
Expropriations Act , R.S.O. 1990, c. E.26. He therefore assessed the value of the flooded 
land at $1.29 per acre based on its value as 90  percent bu shland and 10  percent 
waterfront land, concluding that “the suggestion that Canada could and should have 
paid more than this for the land, amounts to nothing more than optimistic speculation” 
(para. 383).  
[41] The trial judge then assessed other calculable los ses. He ordered 
$13,847,870 in calculable damages. The calculable damages included: $3,272,572 for  
 the hypothetical flowage easement, based on the $1.29 per acre value in 1929; 
$7,836,252 for timber dues; $1,959,094 for the excess acreage deduction; and 
$1,913,949 for community infrastructure.  He then deducted amounts that Canada had 
previously paid.  
[42] The trial judge also added $16,152,130 in non -calculable damages for a 
total award of $30,000,000. The trial judge assessed the non -calculable losses based on  
factors including the amount of the calculable loss, the duration of the non -quantifiable 
losses, the loss of hayland, gardens, and rice fields, and the separation of two LSFN 
communities.  
B. Appeal Decision, 2019 FCA 171, [2020] 1 F.C.R. 745 (per Nadon and Webb 
JJ.A., Gleason J.A. Dissenting)  
[43] Roger Southwind, for himself, and on behalf of the members of the Lac 
Seul Band of Indians and the Lac Seul First Nation (LSFN or Appellant), appealed the 
assessment of equitable compensation to the Federal Court of App eal. The Appellant’s 
primary argument was that the trial judge should have included the loss of a revenue -
sharing agreement in the compensation. In the alternative, the Appellant argued that 
the trial judge was incorrect in his approach to assessing compen sation for the flooded 
land, in applying current expropriation law instead of the law applicable in 1929, and 
in distinguishing the Kananaskis Falls Projects.    
 [44] In dissent, Gleason J.A. would have allowed the appeal. While she rejected 
the primary argument  that the breach resulted in the loss of a revenue -sharing 
agreement, she agreed that the value calculated for the flooded land should have taken 
into account downstream hydroelectricity generation. The trial judge was wrong to 
discount the possibility tha t Canada could have pursued a negotiated settlement that 
would have included a premium on the land in light of the Project. As a fiduciary, 
Canada “was arguably required to pursue a negotiated surrender before proceeding to 
expropriation as a negotiated re solution would probably have been less detrimental to 
the Lac Seul First Nation” (para. 84). The trial judge also made a legal error in 
distinguishing the Kananaskis Falls Projects. Canada had identical legal powers in each 
case but behaved differently.  
[45] For the majority, Nadon J.A. (Webb J.A. concurring) dismissed the appeal. 
He disagreed with Gleason J.A. that the trial judge committed any error of law or any 
palpable and overriding error. More specifically, he disagreed that the trial judge erred 
in dist inguishing the Kananaskis Falls Projects. Comparing the two projects was a 
factual determination; there was no palpable and overriding error of fact; and there was 
no legal error that went to the core of the determination. Thus, the trial judge was 
entitle d to distinguish the projects and assess the fair market value of the land at $1.29 
per acre.  
C. Applicable Provisions   
 [46] The provisions of the Indian Act in force in 1929 provided two ways to 
remove land from a reserve. Section 48 governed takings for a public  purpose:  
48. No portion of any reserve shall be taken for the purpose of any 
railway, road, public work, or work designed for any public utility 
without the consent of the Governor in Council, but any company or 
municipal or local authority having statuto ry power, either Dominion or 
provincial, for taking or using lands or any interest in lands without the 
consent of the owner may, with the consent of the Governor in Council 
as aforesaid, and subject to the terms and conditions imposed by such 
consent, exe rcise such statutory power with respect to any reserve or 
portion of a reserve.  
 
2. In any such case compensation shall be made therefor to the Indians of 
the band, and the exercise of such power, and the taking of the lands or 
interest therein and the determination and payment of the compensation 
shall, unless otherwise provided by the order in council evidencing the 
consent of the Governor in Council, be governed by the requirements 
applicable to the like proceedings by such company, municipal or local  
authority in ordinary cases.  
 
. . . 
 
4. The amount awarded in any case shall be paid to the Minister of 
Finance for the use of the band of Indians for whose benefit the reserve 
is held, and for the benefit of any Indian who has improvements taken or 
injur ed. 
[47] Land could also be surrendered by consent under ss . 50 and 51.  
[48] Treaty 3 states:  
And Her Majesty the Queen hereby agrees and undertakes to lay aside 
reserves for farming lands, due respect being had to lands at present 
cultivated by the said Indians,  and also to lay aside and reserve for the 
benefit of the said Indians, to be administered and dealt with for them by  
 Her Majesty’s Government of the Dominion of Canada, in such a manner 
as shall seem best, other reserves of land in the said territory here by ceded, 
which said reserves shall be selected and set aside where it shall be deemed 
most convenient and advantageous for each band or bands of Indians, by 
the officers of the said Government appointed for that purpose, and such 
selection shall be so mad e after conference with the Indians; provided, 
however, .  . . that the aforesaid reserves of lands, or any interest or right 
therein or appurtenant thereto, may be sold, leased or otherwise disposed 
of by the said Government for the use and benefit of the said Indians, with 
the consent of the Indians entitled thereto first had and obtained.  
 
. . . 
 
It is further agreed between Her Majesty and Her said Indians that such 
sections of the reserves above indicated as may at any time be required for 
Public Works or buildings of what nature soever may be appropriated for 
that purpose by Her Majesty’s Govern ment of the Dominion of Canada, 
due compensation being made for the value of any improvements thereon.  
II. Parties’ Submissions  
[49] The L SFN submits that the courts below erred in their application of the 
principles of equitable compensation. The central issue is how to compensate the LSFN 
in a manner that accords with equitable and constitutional principles, including 
reconciliation and the honour of the Crown. The trial judge erred in considering how 
Canada would likely have proceeded before considering how Canad a as a fiduciary 
ought to have proceeded. A hypothetical expropriation is the wrong paradigm and 
improperly shifts the analysis from restoring what the LSFN lost to fixing Canada’s 
unlawful conduct. A hypothetical expropriation also ignores Canada’s fiduci ary 
obligations and, even if an expropriation had been pursued, Canada had to impair the 
LSFN’s interest as little as possible. It was also incorrect to view Canada’s breaches as 
inevitable, and, in any event, whether the flooding was inevitable does not b reak the  
 causal connection between Canada’s breach and the LSFN’s loss. The Appellant 
submits that the trial judge did not properly consider the LSFN’s perspective and the 
unique nature of its losses and connection to the land. Finally, the Appellant submi ts 
that the trial judge’s approach does not deter Canada’s behaviour.  
[50] Canada submits that the trial judge fairly compensated the LSFN for its 
losses. On the merits of the appeal, Canada submits that the principles of equitable 
compensation are settled and  were properly applied by the courts below. The LSFN 
cannot be compensated for a scenario that would have never occurred. At trial, the 
LSFN was claiming compensation for a loss — a revenue -sharing agreement — that 
was not caused by the breach. The trial j udge referred to a hypothetical expropriation 
scenario to determine what likely would have happened without a breach, in line with 
this Court’s jurisprudence. The determination that Canada would have obtained a 
flowage easement was appropriate in light of the evidence and would have fulfilled 
Canada’s duty to minimally impair the right. Finally, Canada submits that the 
compensation award respects the goal of reconciliation and fulfills the deterrent 
requirement.  
[51] Canada also submits that the LSFN is improper ly making a new argument 
before this Court by asking that the land be valued on the basis of its use for flooding 
purposes. The pleadings, Canada argues, show that the plaintiff sought a revenue -
sharing agreement at trial, not the value of the land for flo oding purposes. It asks that 
this Court not entertain what it submits is a new issue.    
 III. Analysis  
[52] The issue in this appeal is whether the trial judge erred in his assessment 
of equitable compensation, specifically in relation to the value of the flooded lan d. To 
determine whether the trial judge erred, I must consider the content of the fiduciary 
duty in this case, what obligations it imposed, and how the trial judge assessed equitable 
compensation in light of those obligations.  
[53] My analysis proceeds in three  parts. First, I consider the relevant principles 
of the Crown’s relationship to Indigenous Peoples, and more specifically of the 
fiduciary duty that may arise. Second, I consider the principles of equitable 
compensation for breach of fiduciary duty. Third , I apply those principles to the trial 
judge’s assessment of equitable compensation.  
A. Canada’s Fiduciary Duty to Indigenous Peoples  
[54] The existence of a fiduciary duty is not in dispute in this appeal. Canada 
does not contest the trial judge’s determination that Canada owed a fiduciary duty to 
the LSFN and breached that duty. However, the specific nature of the Crown’s 
fiduciary duty to Indigenous Peoples, especially over reserve land, informs how 
equitable compensation must be assessed.  
[55] The Crown’s fiduciar y duty is rooted in the obligation of honourable 
dealing and in the overarching goal of reconciliation between the Crown and the first  
 inhabitants of Canada ( Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests) , 2004 
SCC 73, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 511, at paras . 17-18). Professor Slattery describes the honour 
of the Crown as a “grounding postulate of Canadian constitutional law” (B. Slattery, 
“The Aboriginal Constitution” (2014), 67 S.C.L.R.  (2d) 319, at p. 320). McLachlin C.J. 
explained in Haida Nation that the  “process of reconciliation flows from the Crown’s 
duty of honourable dealing toward Aboriginal peoples, which arises in turn from the 
Crown’s assertion of sovereignty over an Aboriginal people and de facto  control of 
land and resources that were formerly in the control of that people” (para. 32; see also 
R. v. Desautel , 2021 SCC 17, at para. 22). This is an ongoing project that seeks the 
“reconciliation of Aboriginal and non -Aboriginal Canadians in a mutually respectful 
long-term relationship” ( Beckman v. Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation , 2010 SCC 
53, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 103, at para. 10).  
[56] This Court first acknowledged a fiduciary duty in Guerin . In Guerin , 
Canada argued that it could not be subject to a fiduciary duty and, at best, the Crown’s 
control over  Indigenous interests in land is a political trust which is unenforceable by 
the courts (p. 371). Dickson J., writing for a majority, rejected Canada’s argument. 
Instead, he found that Indigenous interests in land are “a pre -existing legal right not 
create d by Royal Proclamation, by s. 18(1) of the Indian Act , or by any other executive 
order or legislative provision” (p. 379; see also J. T. S. McCabe, The Honour of the 
Crown and its Fiduciary Duties to Aboriginal Peoples (2008), at pp.  150-51). In other 
words, the Indigenous interest in land did not flow from the Crown ; it pre -existed the 
Crown’s assertion of sovereignty.   
 [57] Through the Royal Proclamation, 1763 , the Crown undertook 
discretionary control over these pre -existing Indigenous interests in land. The  
Proclamation  provided: “And We do hereby strictly forbid, on Pain of our Displeasure, 
all our loving Subjects from making any Purchases or Settlements whatever, or taking 
Possession of any of the Lands above reserved, without our especial leave and Licenc e 
for that Purpose first obtained .” The Indian Act  and its predecessor statutes formalized 
the process for setting aside reserve land and the Crown’s legal control over that land. 
The Crown thus undertook the “historic responsibility .  . . to act on behalf  of the Indians 
so as to protect their interests in transactions with third parties” ( Guerin , at p. 383). In 
Guerin , this Court recognized that a fiduciary duty arose because the Crown interposed 
itself between Indigenous lands and those who want to lease or purchase the land, 
thereby exercising discretionary control over the land (pp. 383 -84). The Crown has a 
duty that is “in the nature of a private law duty” (p. 385).  
[58] In Osoyoos Indian Band v. Oliver (Town) , 2001 SCC 85, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 
746, Gonthier J., dissenting, but not on that point, clarified that the same fiduciary duty 
applies even where the reserve is not situated on traditional territory in which the First 
Nation may have a pre -existing legal interest. He noted: “.  . . an interest in reserve land s 
to which no aboriginal title attaches and an interest in non -reserve lands to which 
aboriginal title does attach are the same with respect to the generation of a fiduciary 
obligation on the part of the Crown” (para.  163).   
 [59] Guerin  set to rest the idea tha t the trust -like language of historic treaties, 
laws, and proclamations constituted a mere “political trust” unenforceable in courts. 
Instead, an enforceable sui generis fiduciary duty arose where the Crown asserted 
discretionary power over Indigenous Peop les’ specific Aboriginal interests and 
assumed responsibility for those interests ( R. v. Sparrow , [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075, at 
p. 1108). This relationship is not paternalistic in nature; it emerged in a context where 
the military capacities of Indigenous Peopl es were strong and the Crown needed to 
mitigate the risk of conflict between Indigenous Peoples and settlers ( Manitoba Metis 
Federation Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2013 SCC 14, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 623, at 
para. 66;  Slattery, at pp.  322 and 326 ).  
[60] Rooted in the honour of the Crown, the Crown’s fiduciary duty exists to 
further a socially important relationship. It structures the role voluntarily undertaken 
by the Crown as the intermediary between Indigenous interests in land and the interest 
of settl ers. Professor Rotman, in the context of fiduciary relationships generally, puts 
it this way: “.  . . while it may appear that the fiduciary concept exists to protect 
beneficiaries’ interests, that effect is merely ancillary to its protection of fiduciary 
relationships” ( L. I. Rotman, “Understanding Fiduciary Duties and Relationship 
Fiduciarity” (2017), 62 McGill L.J.  975, at pp. 987 -88). In the context of our national 
history, the relationship between the Crown and Indigenous Peoples goes to the very 
founda tion of this country and to the heart of its identity. Indeed, the need to reconcile 
the assertion of Crown sovereignty with the pre -existence of Indigenous Peoples, and 
to reconcile Indigenous and non -Indigenous Canadians is of “fundamental importance”  
 (R. v. Van der Peet , [1996] 2 S.C.R. 507, at para. 310, per McLachlin  J., dissenting, but 
not on this point). The honour of the Crown — and the sui generis fiduciary duty to 
which it gives rise — is a vital component of the relationship between the Crown and  
Indigenous Peoples.  
[61] However, not all aspects of this relationship are fiduciary in nature ( Haida 
Nation , at para. 18; Wewaykum Indian Band v. Canada , 2002 SCC 79, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 
245, at paras. 81 and 83). The fiduciary duty does not attach to every inter est of 
Indigenous Peoples. As Binnie J. stated in Wewaykum , “[t]he fiduciary duty imposed 
on the Crown does not exist at large but in relation to specific Indian interests” 
(para.  81). The fiduciary duty imposes heavy obligations when it does arise. The 
fiduciary duty may arise when the Crown exercises discretionary control over 
cognizable Indigenous interests or where the conditions of a private law ad hoc 
fiduciary relationship are met ( Williams Lake Indian Band v. Canada (Aboriginal 
Affairs and Northern Development) , 2018 SCC 4, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 83,  at para. 44; 
Manitoba Metis , at paras. 48 -50; Wewaykum , at para. 85).  
[62] The fiduciary duty itself is shaped by the context to which it applies, which 
means that its content varies with the nature and the importa nce of the right being 
protected ( Williams Lake , at para. 55; Wewaykum , at para. 86; Manitoba Metis , at 
para.  49). The Crown’s control over Indigenous interests in land is at the core of the 
relationship between the Crown and Indigenous Peoples. Consequent ly, a strong 
fiduciary duty arises where the Crown is exercising control over a First Nation’s land.  
 The same is true where the Crown is exercising control over Aboriginal and treaty 
rights that are protected under s. 35 of the Constitution Act , 1982  (Ermi neskin  Indian 
Band and Nation v. Canada , 2009 SCC 9, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 222, at para. 46 ).  
[63] In a case involving reserve land, the sui generis nature of the interest in 
reserve land informs the fiduciary duty. Reserve land is not a fungible commodity. 
Instead,  reserve land reflects the essential relationship between Indigenous Peoples and 
the land. In Osoyoos , Iacobucci J. wrote that Aboriginal interests in land has an 
“important cultural component that reflects the relationship between an aboriginal 
community and the land and the inherent and unique value in the land itself which is 
enjoyed by the community” (para. 46). The importance of the interest in reserve land 
is heightened by the fact that, in many cases such as this one, the reserve land was set 
aside a s part of an obligation that arose out of treaties between the Crown and 
Indigenous Peoples.  
[64] The fiduciary duty imposes the following obligations on the Crown: 
loyalty, good faith, full disclosure, and, where reserve land is involved, the protection 
and pr eservation of the First Nation’s quasi -proprietary interest from exploitation 
(Williams Lake , at para. 46; Wewaykum , at para. 86). The standard of care is that of a 
person of ordinary prudence in managing their own affairs ( Williams Lake , at para. 46). 
In the context of a surrender of reserve land, this Court has recognized that the duty 
also requires that the Crown protect against improvident bargains, manage the process 
to advance the best interests of the First Nation, and ensure that it consents to the  
 surrender ( Blueberry River Indian Band v. Canada (Department of Indian Affairs and 
Northern Development) , [1995] 4 S.C.R. 344, at paras.  35 and 96 ). In an expropriation, 
the obligation to ensure consent is replaced by an obligation to minimally impair the 
protected interest ( Osoyoos , at para. 54).  
B. Principles of Equitable Compensation  
[65] The basic principles of equitable compensation are not in dispute in this 
appeal. However, the parties disagree about their application to breaches of the 
Crown’s fiduciary dut y in relation to land held for the benefit of Indigenous Peoples.  
[66] As I shall explain, equitable compensation is a loss -based remedy that 
deters wrongdoing and enforces the trust at the heart of the fiduciary relationship. It 
differs from common law damages  because of the “unique foundation and goals of 
equity” ( Canson Enterprises Ltd. v. Boughton & Co. , [1991] 3 S.C.R. 534,  at p. 543, 
per McLachlin J.). The trial judge must begin by closely analyzing the nature of the 
fiduciary relationship so as to ensure that the loss is assessed in relation to the 
obligations owed by the fiduciary. The loss must be caused in fact by the fiduciary’s 
breach, and the causation analysis is not limited by foreseeability (to use the language 
in Canson , at p. 552, where foreseea bility was used synonymously with remoteness in 
this context).  
[67]  This Court’s decision in Guerin  explained that, although a fiduciary 
relationship is different than a traditional trust relationship, breach of the Crown’s  
 fiduciary duty gives rise to the sam e equitable remedies as breach of trust (p. 376; see 
also Wewaykum , at para. 94). The available equitable remedies include, among others, 
accounting for profits, constructive trust, and equitable compensation ( Canson , at 
p. 588, per La Forest J. ) Accounting for profits and constructive trust are gains -based 
remedies, meaning they are measured by the fiduciary’s gain rather than the plaintiff’s 
loss. The purpose is to undo  the fiduciary’s gain. Equitable compensation, on the other 
hand, is a loss -based remedy; the purpose is to make up  the plaintiff’s loss (S. L. Bray, 
“Fiduciary Remedies”, in E. J. Criddle, P. B. Miller and R. H. Stikoff, eds., The Oxford 
Handbook of Fiduciary Law (2019), 449, at pp.  449 and 456).  
[68] When the Crown breaches its fiduciary duty, the remedy will seek to 
restore the plaintiff to the position the plaintiff would have been in had the Crown not 
breached its duty ( Guerin , at p. 360, citing Re Dawson; Union Fidelity Trustee Co. v. 
Perpetual Trustee Co. (1966), 84 W.N. (Pt . 1) (N.S.W.) 399 (S.C.); Hodgkinson v. 
Simms , [1994] 3 S.C.R. 377 , at p. 440) When it is possible to restore the plaintiff’s 
assets in specie , accounting for profits and constructive trust are often appropriate (see 
Guerin , at pp. 360 -61; Hodgkinson , at pp. 452-53). When, however, restoring the 
plaintiff’s assets in specie  is not available, equitable compensation is the preferred 
remedy ( Canson , at p. 547).  The LSFN seeks equitable compensation in this case 
because what it lost — its land — cannot be retur ned. It is therefore unnecessary to 
consider gains -based remedies.   
 [69] Equitable compensation is equity’s counterpart to common law damages 
(see Whitefish Lake Band of Indians v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2007 ONCA 744, 
87 O.R. (3d) 321,  at para. 48). It is d iscretionary and restitutionary in nature, aiming to 
restore the actual value of the thing lost through the fiduciary’s breach, referred to as 
the plaintiff’s lost opportunity ( Canson , at pp. 547 -48, 551 -52, 555 and 585).  
(1) Causation  
[70] To award equitable comp ensation, there must be factual causation: the 
fiduciary’s breach must have caused, in fact, the plaintiff’s lost opportunity ( Canson , 
at p. 551; see also Stirrett v. Cheema , 2020 ONCA 288, 150 O.R. (3d) 561, at para. 69). 
This basic principle, that equita ble compensation restores the lost opportunity caused 
in fact by the fiduciary’s breach, is uncontroversial. However, there has been debate 
about the extent to which the causation analysis should borrow from the common law 
of damages and import limiting fa ctors such as foreseeability.  
[71] In concurring reasons in Canson , McLachlin J. stressed the differences 
between equitable remedies and common law damages, explaining that the purpose of 
equity is to enforce the trust which lies at its heart (p. 543). Analogy with common law 
damages may not be appropriate given this misalignment between the purpose of 
fiduciary obligations and obligations through tort and contract. The same point was 
adopted by Lord Reed J.S.C. in AIB Group (UK) plc v. Mark Redler & Co. Solicit ors, 
[2014] UKSC 58, [2015] A.C. 1503, at para. 83:   
 In negligence and contract the parties were taken to be independent and 
equal actors, concerned primarily with their own self -interest. 
Consequently, the law sought a balance between enforcing obligations  by 
awarding compensation, and preserving optimum freedom for those 
involved in the relationship. The essence of a fiduciary relationship, by 
contrast, was that one party pledged herself to act in the best interests of 
the other. The freedom of the fiducia ry was diminished by the nature of the 
obligation she had undertaken. The fiduciary relationship had trust, not 
self-interest, at its core.  
[72] Another difference between equitable compensation and common law 
damages is that equity is especially concerned with  deterring wrongful conduct by 
fiduciaries. As Professor Rotman observed, “[b]eneficiaries are .  . . implicitly 
dependent upon and peculiarly vulnerable to their fiduciaries’ use, misuse, or abuse of 
power over their interests” (p. 991). It is therefore cr ucial that equitable remedies deter 
fiduciaries from misusing their powers. By restoring the beneficiary’s lost opportunity, 
equitable compensation enforces the fiduciary relationship and deters the fiduciary’s 
wrongful conduct.  
[73] Due to these differences, rather than relying on common law principles, 
McLachlin J. explained that the proper approach to equitable compensation “is to look 
to the policy behind compensation for breach of fiduciary duty and determine what 
remedies will best further that policy” ( Canson , at p. 545). McLachlin J.’s approach 
was subsequently followed by this Court in Cadbury Schweppes Inc. v. FBI Foods Ltd. , 
[1999] 1 S.C.R. 142, and recognizes that the applicable rules will depend both on the 
nature of the fiduciary relationship and the fiduciary obligations: “ Differences between 
different types of fiduciary relationships may, depending on the circumstances, dictate  
 different approaches to damages” ( Canson , at p. 546).  In other words, “[t]he rules 
appropriate to a breach of duty by a trustee .  . . have to be determined in the light of the 
characteristics of the obligation in question” ( AIB, at para. 93). There must be a close 
relationship between the fiduciary duty and the fiduciary remedy, and the fiduciary 
duty must “forcefully shape  the content of [the] fiduciary remed[y]” (Bray, at p. 451). 
Thus, while factual causation will always apply to equitable compensation in the sense 
that the fiduciary’s breach must cause in fact the plaintiff’s loss, common law limiting 
factors will not re adily apply because of the nature of the fiduciary relationship and 
obligations.   
[74] Equity assesses the loss at the date of trial and with the benefit of hindsight 
(Guerin , at pp. 361 -62, per Wilson J.; Canson , at p. 556; Target Holdings Ltd. v. 
Redferns , [1996] 1 A.C. 421 (H.L.), at pp. 437 -39). This means that equity compensates 
the plaintiff for the lost opportunity caused by the breach, regardless of whether that 
opportunity could have been foreseen at the time of breach. McLachlin J. described the 
analy sis as follows:  
The plaintiff’s actual loss as a consequence of the breach is to be assessed 
with the full benefit of hindsight. Foreseeability is not a concern in 
assessing compensation, but it is essential that the losses made good are 
only those which, on a common sense view of causation, were caused by 
the breach.  
 
(Canson , at p. 556)  
[75] McLachlin J.’s use of the phrase “common sense view of causation” in 
Canson  should not be taken to mean that the causation analysis in equitable  
 compensation cases will a lways have an “intuitively obvious answer” ( AIB, at 
para.  95). This is not always the case; trial judges are often faced with difficult 
questions of causation in claims for equitable compensation. Instead, the phrase 
“common sense” clarifies that the rules  developed in legal causation, such as 
foreseeability, do not readily apply in equity: “The requirement that the loss must result 
from the breach of the relevant equitable duty does not negate the fact that ‘causality’ 
in the legal sense as limited by fore seeability at the time of breach does not apply in 
equity” ( Canson , at p.  552). Professor Rotman explains the same point as follows:  
Each starts with the idea of “but for,” “cause -in-fact,” or “ sine qua non ,” 
causation. This generally satisfies Equity, but  the common law requires 
more; it demands a finding of materiality or substantial cause to link the 
impugned activity with the harm to the plaintiff. Further, the common law 
imports ideas of foreseeability (or reasonable contemplation) and 
remoteness into its assessment of causality. .  . . These other considerations 
do not readily enter into Equity’s assessment of fiduciary accountability.  
 
(Fiduciary Law (2005), at p.  634).  
See, also, Target Holdings , where  Lord Browne -Wilkinson observed that “the common 
law rules of remoteness of damage and causation do not apply” (p. 434).  
[76] Canada argues that in valuing the loss the benefit of hindsight cannot mean 
that the beneficiary is put in a better position than it would have been in had the 
fiduciary observed its duty at the time  of breach. This argument was explicitly rejected 
by this Court in Blueberry River , where McLachlin J. wrote that concern about 
“unexpected windfall” amounted to “bringing foreseeability into the fiduciary analysis 
through the back door” (p ara. 103). Similarly, in Guerin , compensation was assessed  
 at a higher level than would have been possible at the moment of breach because the 
most valuable use of the asset between breach and date of trial was not foreseeable at 
the time of breach. Concer ns about a “windfall” cannot therefore subtract from the 
“equitable approach of looking at what actually happened to values in later years” 
(Canson , at p. 551). Equity will not be limited by foreseeability, unless it is “necessary 
to reach a just and fair result” ( Hodgkinson , at p. 443, per La Forest J.).  
[77] There are very good reasons why foreseeability does not apply to the 
Crown’s breach of fiduciary duty in this case. In Canson , La Forest J. held that it would 
not apply where a fiduciary has discretionary control over a beneficiary’s property 
(p. 578). Indigenous interests in land are quasi -proprietary in nature; they are at the 
heart of the Crown -Indigenous relationship and are central to Indigenous identity and 
culture ( Wewaykum , at paras. 74 and 86; Osoy oos, at para.  46). Moreover, in Guerin , 
Wilson J. accepted that foreseeability would not apply to breaches of the Crown’s 
fiduciary duty towards Indigenous Peoples (pp. 360 -62; see also Whitefish Lake , at 
paras. 52 -55). The Crown’s fiduciary duty is grounded in the honour of the Crown and 
breaches of the duty are different in kind than private law breaches of contract or tort.  
(2) Equitable Presumptions  
[78] To achieve these purposes of equitable compensation, the assessment is 
also guided by presumptions that  equity makes against breaching fiduciaries.   
 [79] Equity presumes that the plaintiff would have made the most favourable 
use of the trust property ( Guerin , at pp. 362 -63; Canson , at p. 545; Oosterhoff on 
Trusts: Text, Commentary and Materials  (9th ed. 2019), by  A. H. Oosterhoff, 
R. Chambers and M.  McInnes, at p. 1018). In Guerin , for example, the Musqueam 
Indian Band expected certain advantageous terms in a lease agreement that Canada 
negotiated on its behalf with a private developer. Canada failed to secure tho se terms, 
but instead entered into a less -favourable agreement that was not authorized by the 
band. In determining how to compensate the band for breach of Canada’s fiduciary 
duty, however, the trial judge determined that the favourable lease terms were no t the 
appropriate measure of compensation because no third party would have agreed to such 
terms and that measure of loss was not, therefore, causally connected to the breach. The 
trial judge then considered what the highest and best use of the asset was b etween 
breach and date of trial, finding that it was a residential development. This was even 
though the trial judge found that the area would likely not have developed until some 
years after the breach. As McLachlin J. observed in Canson , the trial judge “assessed, 
as best he could, the value of the actual opportunity lost as a result of the breach” 
(p. 552).  
[80]  The focus is always on whether the plaintiff’s lost opportunity was caused 
in fact by the fiduciary’s breach. Equity will assess that opportunity u nder the 
presumption  that the beneficiary would have put the asset to its most favourable use. 
The most favourable use must be realistic. The common law requires a plaintiff to lead 
evidence to that effect.   
 [81] There are additional equitable presumptions that are applicable in 
appropriate cases. The presumption of legality, discussed in more detail below, 
prevents breaching fiduciaries from reducing compensation by arguing they would not 
have complied with the law.  
[82] Another presumption, the so -called Brickenden  rule, applies where the 
fiduciary breached a duty to disclose material facts. The breaching fiduciary is 
prevented from arguing that the outcome would be the same regardless of whether the 
facts were disclosed ( Brickenden v. London Loan & Savings Co. , [1934] 3 D.L.R. 465 
(P.C.)).  
[83] In summary, equitable compensation deters wrongful conduct by 
fiduciaries in order to enforce the relationship at the heart of the fiduciary duty. It 
restores the opportunity that the plaintiff lost as a result of the fiduciary’s  breach. The 
trial judge must begin by closely analyzing the nature of the fiduciary relationship so 
as to ensure that the loss is assessed in relation to the obligations undertaken by the 
fiduciary. The loss must be caused in fact by the fiduciary’s breac h, but the causation 
analysis will not import foreseeability into breaches of the Crown’s fiduciary duty 
towards Indigenous Peoples. Equitable presumptions — including most favourable use 
— apply to the assessment of the loss. The most favourable use must be realistic. The 
trial judge must be satisfied that the assessment reflects the value the beneficiary could 
have actually received from the asset between breach and trial and the importance of 
the relationship between the Crown and Indigenous Peoples.   
 C. Application  
[84] In light of these principles, I turn now to the question of whether the trial 
judge erred in his assessment of equitable compensation.  
[85] The standards of review identified in Housen v. Nikolaisen , 2002 SCC 33, 
[2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, apply to awards o f equitable compensation. Questions of law are 
reviewable on a standard of correctness. The application of the relevant equitable 
principles to the facts is reviewable on a standard of palpable and overriding error, 
absent an extricable error in principle which is reviewed on a correctness standard. As 
discussed below, the trial judge’s reasons are tainted by legal errors reviewable on a 
correctness standard.  
[86] As noted above, the trial judge concluded that Canada owed a fiduciary 
duty to the LSFN and breach ed that duty. He determined that Canada had the following 
specific obligations: (1) a duty of loyalty and good faith to the LSFN in the discharge 
of its mandate as trustee of the Reserve land; (2) a duty to provide full disclosure and 
to consult with the b and; (3) a duty to act with ordinary prudence with a view to the 
best interests of the First Nation; and (4) a duty to protect and preserve the LSFN’s 
proprietary interest in the Reserve from exploitation. Further, the trial judge noted that 
Canada’s dutie s may have expanded when it committed to the LSFN that it would 
protect its interest “to the fullest possible extent” (para.  227). The trial judge held that 
Canada breached these duties. These findings are not challenged in this Court.   
 [87] However, the trial j udge also concluded that Canada’s duty only required 
it to obtain the amount provided for under general expropriation law as payment for a 
hypothetical flowage easement. He reached this conclusion largely based on the 
following findings: the Project could not be stopped because Canada, Ontario, and 
Manitoba wanted it completed; the LSFN had little bargaining power to extract a better 
deal; Canada could have lawfully expropriated the Reserve land as a public work and 
paid only the amount required under appli cable expropriation law; and, realistically, 
the LSFN would have surrendered the land or it would have been expropriated under 
those terms. The trial judge suggests that paying anything greater than fair market value 
would have violated Canada’s duties to the Canadian public. He assessed the value of 
the flooded land at an average of $1.29 an acre as bushland and waterfront land, based 
on Canada’s evidence regarding the 1929 value of the land without  the Project. The 
trial judge determined the value of this  loss at the time of the trial to be $3,272,572.  
[88] Canada submits that the trial judge correctly considered the “non -breach” 
world and determined, based upon the evidence, that a flowage easement measured by 
expropriation values is what would have likely ha ppened had Canada not breached its 
duties.  
[89] I agree with the Appellant that the trial judge erred in concluding that a 
hypothetical expropriation — the minimum statutory obligation — would have fulfilled 
Canada’s fiduciary obligations. This legal error imp acted his assessment of equitable 
compensation because it led him to rely on general principles of expropriation law to  
 value the loss and to conclude that compensation would not be assessed at a higher 
value than the minimum required under an expropriatio n. The fundamental error of the 
trial judge was that he focused on what Canada would likely have done  instead of what 
Canada ought to have  done  as a fiduciary.  
(1) The Appellant Is Not Precluded From Raising These Arguments on Appeal  
[90] First, as a preliminary m atter, I would reject Canada’s argument that there 
are procedural obstacles to considering the merits of this appeal. Canada submits that 
the Appellant’s proposal to assess compensation on the basis of “the use of the lands 
for flooding purposes” is a new issue that is not properly before this Court and should 
not be given effect by this Court (R.F., at para. 55). While it is true that the Appellant’s 
theory of compensation has changed during this litigation, the approach of valuing the 
lands for flooding p urposes was in issue at trial.  
[91] The argument that the Appellant relies on at this Court is the same 
argument relied on at the Court of Appeal and was subject to full submissions at both 
the Court of Appeal and this Court. The “use of the lands for flooding  purposes” 
assessment is the approach that was accepted as one of two alternatives by Gleason  J.A. 
in dissent below and rejected by Nadon J.A, for the majority.  
[92] More importantly, the argument that the land should be valued on the basis 
of its use as flood ed land for the Project was an issue at trial. The LSFN proposed 
various models of compensation at trial and the primary model — a revenue -sharing  
 agreement — presumes that the use is as land flooded for hydroelectricity generation. 
According to the trial judge, the LSFN’s main theory at trial was the “loss of 
opportunity for hydroelectric benefits” (para. 10). The Appellant’s expert witness, 
Norris Wilson, also testified that the value of the land must include the anticipated 
improvements in the land due t o the hydroelectricity project. The trial judge rejected 
this approach (para. 380). The evidence from the Kananaskis Falls and related 
agreements  was also available to the trial judge and the trial judge correctly understood 
the implication of this evidenc e to be that the land would be valued on the basis of its 
“usefulness in connection with the development of power” (para. 381). The trial judge 
acknowledged that those agreements were “relied upon by the LSFN as a precedent of 
what Canada ought to have obt ained to protect the interests of the LSFN” (para.  24). 
Thus, I see no bar to addressing the merits of this appeal.  
(2) The Nature of the Fiduciary Obligations  
[93] Following the approach taken by this Court in Guerin , the first step in 
assessing equitable compensa tion is to determine what the fiduciary would have been 
expected to do had it not breached its obligations.  
[94] In applying what Canada’s obligations to the LSFN required in this case, 
the trial judge focused on the fact that Canada could legally expropriate the land under 
s. 48 of the Indian Act because the Project was a public work. This led the trial judge 
to improperly conclude that Canada’s fiduciary obligations required Canada to do no 
more than the minimum required in an expropriation of fee simple land s. As I shall  
 explain, the fiduciary duty required more than compensation based upon expropriation 
principles in this case for three reasons. First, the presence of legal discretion to take or 
expropriate the land in s. 48 of the Indian Act did not define the obligations imposed 
by Canada’s fiduciary duty. Second, the fact that the land was required for a public 
work did not negate the obligations imposed by Canada’s fiduciary duty. And third, the 
principles of expropriation law are fundamentally different than those underlying 
Indigenous interest in land. Instead, the fiduciary obligations in this case must reflect 
the nature of the interest, the impact of the loss on the First Nation, the importance of 
the fiduciary relationship, and reconciliation, which is the overarching goal of the 
fiduciary duty itself, based in the honour of the Crown.  
[95] Therefore, for reasons that follow, I conclude that even though the land 
was needed for a public work, the fiduciary duty still required Canada to first attempt 
to neg otiate a surrender with the LSFN. If negotiations failed and Canada expropriated 
the land under s. 48, it would at least have had to provide fair compensation reflecting 
the land’s use as water storage for hydroelectricity generation.  
(a) The Presence of Legal  Discretion in Section 48 of the Indian Act  
[96] The provisions of the Indian Act  in force at the time provided two routes 
to remove land from a reserve: a taking and a surrender. Sections 50 and 51 provided 
that reserve land could be surrendered to the Crown with the consent of the First Nation. 
Alternatively, subs. 48(1) provided that land could be taken for a public work, but only 
with the “consent of the Governor in Council” and “subject to the terms and conditions  
 imposed by such consent”. Compensation was  to be governed by the “requirements 
applicable to the like proceedings by such company, municipal or local authority in 
ordinary cases” unless  “otherwise provided by the order in council” (subs.  48(2)). The 
Indian Act  did not, therefore, limit the discret ion of the Crown to negotiate, or the 
discretion of the Governor in Council to determine the terms of a taking. There was no 
conflict between the requirements of the statute and the requirements imposed by the 
fiduciary duty. The statute accommodated the e xercise of the Crown’s fiduciary duty 
by recognizing the discretion to provide for special requirements.  
[97] The provisions in s. 48 must therefore be understood in light of the pre-
existing fiduciary duty  of the Crown. The fiduciary duty, not just the Indian Act, 
imposed substantive obligations on how Canada was to exercise its discretion over the 
reserve land. Dickson J. explained the relationship between the Crown’s discretion its 
fiduciary duty as follows: “.  . . discretion on the part of the Crown, far fro m ousting, as 
the Crown contends, the jurisdiction of the courts to regulate the relationship between 
the Crown and the Indians, has the effect of transforming the Crown’s obligation into 
a fiduciary one” ( Guerin , at p. 384). Similarly, Wagner J. (as he th en was) recently 
stated that the “fiduciary obligation requires that the Crown’s discretionary control be 
exercised in accordance with the standard of conduct to which equity holds a fiduciary” 
and that this is embodied in the “fiduciary duties of loyalty,  good faith and full 
disclosure” (see Williams Lake , at para. 46). Equity, by its very nature, imposes 
additional considerations. The legal authority of the Crown in s. 48 does not answer the 
question of what the fiduciary duty required in this case. That authority imposed a  
 minimum — not a maximum — requirement on the exercise of the Crown’s discretion. 
The presence of legal discretion in the Indian Act , did not, therefore, negate or define 
the obligations imposed by the Crown’s fiduciary duty.  
[98] The effect  of the trial judge’s reliance on the legal powers conferred in the 
Indian Act  also raises a question regarding the role of the presumption of legality in 
this case. The presumption of legality or lawfulness is an equitable presumption meant 
to prevent fid uciaries from reducing  compensation by arguing that they would have 
broken the law ( Whitefish Lake , at para. 69). It cannot be inverted and used instead to 
limit compensation by suggesting that the fiduciary is expected to do no more than what 
the law, not equity, requires. The trial judge placed great emphasis on what Canada 
would have done had it acted “legally” and equated this with what Canada should have 
done  had it fulfilled its fiduciary duty (see, e.g., para.  358). However, correctly applied, 
the presumption of legality simply means that Canada is prevented from arguing that it 
would not have complied with the rules in the Indian Act  or Treaty 3. The presum ption 
is of little assistance in determining either the fiduciary obligations or the assessment 
of loss in this case.  
[99] The trial judge’s reasons can also be read as relying on the legal powers 
conferred in s. 48 to improperly focus on the inequality of bar gaining power between 
the LSFN and Canada,  its fiduciary, as a factor to limit compensation. It is appropriate 
in assessing the lost opportunity to consider as one factor what third parties, such as 
Ontario or Manitoba, would have been willing to pay and w hat their relative bargaining  
 power was. However, the trial judge should not consider the “little leverage” the First 
Nation had with its fiduciary in assessing compensation (para. 318). Obviously, Canada 
is not permitted to use its legal power over the be neficiary to force an unfair settlement 
on the beneficiary. Such reasoning effectively turns Canada’s fiduciary obligation on 
its head, allowing Canada to benefit from the very discretionary power over the LSFN 
which is the source of its fiduciary duty.  
[100]  The legal authority of Canada to expropriate the land under s.  48 therefore 
does not define the fiduciary duty in this case.  
(b) The Presence of a Public Work  
[101]  Because of Canada’s public responsibilities to Canadians generally, it may 
sometimes need to conside r broader public interests in addition to its sui generis  
fiduciary duty to Indigenous Peoples. While an ordinary fiduciary is not generally 
permitted to balance its own interests against those of the beneficiary, here, s.  48 
empowers Canada to expropriate  reserve land without consent if the land is needed for 
a public work. However, this Court’s jurisprudence shows that the fiduciary duty 
continues to apply even if the land is needed for a public work.  
[102]  This Court held in Guerin  that Canada could not escap e liability in equity 
by arguing that it was only bound by a public trust. In other words, the Court rejected 
the idea that the fiduciary duty is comparable to the normal exercise of government 
powers that balances competing priorities or interests. This w as confirmed in Osoyoos  
 where Iacobucci J. applied the fiduciary duty to expropriations and wrote that the 
“public interest [cannot] trump” the Indigenous interests (para. 52). In Osoyoos , the 
Court explicitly rejected  Canada’s argument that the fiduciary duty does not arise if 
there is a conflict between Canada’s public law duties and its obligation to hold reserve 
land for the benefit of a First Nation (para. 51). While the Crown can decide that a 
public work is in the public interest and should thus proc eed, the manner  in which it 
proceeds is subject to the fiduciary duty (para. 52; S. Luk, “Not So Many Hats: The 
Crown’s Fiduciary Obligations to Aboriginal Communities since Guerin ” (2013), 76 
Sask. L. Rev.  1, at p. 17).   
[103]  Similarly, this Court’s statement  in Wewaykum  that the Crown is expected 
to “have regard to the interest of all affected parties, not just the Indian interest”, does 
not support the argument that Canada must simply balance existing Indigenous interests 
in reserve land against other public  interests (para.  96). In Wewaykum , Canada owed a 
narrower  fiduciary duty towards the various First Nations because Canada’s actions 
took place prior to reserve creation and involved land on which the First Nations did 
not claim title based on an existing aboriginal or treaty right. The First Nations therefore 
did not have a quasi -proprietary interest in the land at issue at the relevant time 
(para.  96; Luk, at p. 19). While Canada had an obligation of loyalty, good faith, full 
disclosure, and ordinary dili gence, there was no obligation to protect the quasi -
proprietary interest. The Court emphasized, however, that once a reserve is created, the 
fiduciary duty expands to include the obligation of “protection and preservation of the 
band’s quasi -proprietary in terest in the reserve from exploitation” and this includes  
 protection from “exploitation by the Crown itself” ( Wewaykum , at paras.  86 and 100). 
In this case, there is no dispute that the LSFN had a quasi -proprietary interest in the 
Reserve.  
(c) The Content of the Fiduciary Duty Flows From the Nature of the 
Indigenous Interest and Is Not Defined by Expropriation Principles  
[104]  In the context of an expropriation or taking, our jurisprudence has imposed 
a duty requiring the Crown to minimally impair the protected inte rest ( Osoyoos , at 
para.  52). This means that the Crown must preserve the Indigenous interest “to the 
greatest extent practicable” (para. 53). This requirement of minimal impairment is 
consistent with Binnie J.’s observation in Wewaykum  that the fiduciary d uty also 
prevents exploitation of Indigenous interests by the Crown, not just by third parties. An 
apparent conflict with the general fiduciary obligation of strict loyalty is created where 
the Crown decides that reserve land is necessary for a public work  and takes that land 
without the consent of the First Nation. To resolve this tension, the fiduciary duty 
requires the Crown to seriously consider the impact on the First Nation and how best 
to minimize that impact. As a fiduciary, the Crown has the duty t o preserve the First 
Nation’s quasi -proprietary interest in the land as much as possible and to ensure fair 
compensation reflecting the sui generis  interest. This duty applies even where the 
Crown considers a taking to be necessary for the public interest.   
[105]  Canada submits that the duty to preserve the interest to the greatest extent 
possible is met even if expropriation principles are applied in this case. I cannot agree.  
 Under an expropriation of fee simple land, the value of the land to the public work is  
generally removed from compensation. Therefore, even though the expropriation value 
considers the highest and best use of the land at the time of expropriation, this generally 
does not include the value of the land to the scheme itself (R. Mainville, An O verview 
of Aboriginal and Treaty Rights and Compensation for Their Breach (2001), at pp.  88-
89). This is because expropriation law prevents landowners from reaping a windfall 
from the public work, and instead seeks to provide them with the compensation 
necessary to purchase replacement land. Conversely, in Osoyoos , the Court emphasized 
the unique importance of Indigenous interests in land: they are at the centre of the 
relationship between the Crown and Indigenous Peoples and are not fungible 
commodities th at can be easily replaced by buying additional fee simple land 
(paras.  45-46; Mainville, at p.  106). This led the Court to affirm that the principles 
underlying Indigenous interests in land are fundamentally different from the principles 
underlying expropr iation law ( Osoyoos , at para. 45). Expropriation law reflects fee 
simple interests in land, not the sui generis Indigenous interests in land. Although 
expropriation law “can serve as a reference point from which to consider compensation 
in cases of justifi able infringements of Aboriginal or treaty rights, .  . . it cannot serve 
as the governing legal framework in such cases” (Mainville, at p. 106). Expropriation 
law is not the appropriate legal framework governing historic breaches of the Crown’s 
fiduciary d uty to protect a First Nation’s interest in reserve land.   
[106]  If expropriation law does not limit the fiduciary duty in this case, there is 
no basis to say that Canada’s duty to preserve the LSFN’s interest to the greatest extent  
 possible must exclude  a duty  to obtain compensation for the value of the land to the 
scheme. Instead, given the LSFN’s sui generis interest in the Reserve land and the 
impact on the LSFN, the duty here clearly required Canada to capture the full potential 
value of the land for the LS FN. To that end, the highest and best use of the land at the 
time of breach was clearly the land’s intended use as water storage for hydroelectricity 
generation.  
[107]  There is no doubt that the nature of the interest impacted in this case is of 
fundamental impo rtance to the LSFN and lies at the heart of its relationship with the 
Crown. It is a quasi -proprietary interest in 11,304 acres of Reserve land that was set 
aside for the LSFN’s communal use in exchange for traditional territory that it 
surrendered in Trea ty 3. The location of the Reserve was established in consultation 
with the LSFN. The land was chosen because of its economic, cultural, and spiritual 
importance to its members. The land sustained its way of life, and the proximity to Lac 
Seul was particula rly important. The riparian area — the area that was flooded — was 
of special importance to the LSFN. It is where its members hunted, trapped, fished and 
cultivated wild rice, built their homes and grew their gardens.  
[108]  Expropriation principles are also inap propriate given the tremendous 
impact that Canada knew the Project would have on the LSFN. Here, Canada knew 
early in the development of the Project that the impact would be catastrophic. As the 
trial judge noted, the local government supervisor observed a t the time that the Reserve 
would be “ruined for any purpose [for] which it was set aside” (Trial Reasons, at  
 para.  156). This was followed by repeated warnings of the impact of the flooding. And 
the impact was ultimately as bad as had been feared. After t he water levels rose, 11,304 
acres of the Reserve were left flooded and rendered permanently unusable. The flooded 
sections were the most important sections of the Reserve — the lakefront land — land 
that was central to the life of the First Nation. The Pr oject caused “very considerable” 
damage to the Reserve (para. 152, quoting A.R. Supp., vol.  LII, at p.  316) and Mr. Bury 
understood, at the time, what was expected of Canada given the enormous impact: “.  . . 
generous monetary compensation” (para.  156).  
[109]  The nature of the interest and the impact on the First Nation will always be 
relevant to assessing the appropriate compensation for the use of its reserve land. 
Because a First Nation must consent in a negotiated surrender, its members will clearly 
consider t he interest they are giving up and the impact on their community. And Canada 
must also consider these factors as part of its obligation to protect the First Nation 
against an improvident bargain. Equally, where Canada proceeds through a taking, the 
fiducia ry duty requires Canada to consider both the nature of the interest and the impact 
of the taking on the First Nation in assessing how to minimally impair the protected 
interest.  
[110]  While legal expropriation represents the minimum entitlement, this is not 
to suggest that the value of compensation in equity will always exceed a comparable 
expropriation of fee simple land. However, Canada is never entitled to proceed in the 
same manner as an expropriation of fee simple lands. Canada must always keep the  
 First Nat ion informed, attempt to negotiate a surrender before proceeding to an 
expropriation, and ensure compensation reflecting the nature of the interest and the 
impact on the community.  
(d) Summary of the Fiduciary Obligations  
[111]  Therefore, the trial judge’s descripti on of the fiduciary obligations in this 
case was based on his narrow focus on legal discretion in s. 48. Even though 11,304 
acres, or 17  percent of the Reserve, would be flooded, the trial judge determined that 
s. 48 allowed Canada to take the land for its  value under expropriation law — without 
regard to the value of the land to the Project  — and that the fiduciary duty required no 
more. This is despite the fact that Canada was warned that the Reserve would be “ruined 
for any purpose [for] which it was set  aside”. I disagree. The fiduciary duty set a higher 
bar than expropriation law given the sui generis  interest in the Reserve land and the 
tremendous impact on the LSFN.  
[112]  Instead, Canada ought  to have first attempted to negotiate a surrender. 
Canada’s fiduc iary obligations to preserve the LSFN’s quasi -proprietary interest, 
advance its best interests, and protect it from an improvident bargain required it to 
ensure the highest compensation possible. The LSFN’s interest in the Reserve land 
included an interest  in its anticipated use — which was as land for hydroelectricity 
generation. Canada was under an obligation to secure compensation for this value if 
the Project was to go forward and the fact that the land was needed for a public work 
did not change this.   
 [113]  If negotiations for a surrender of the land by the LSFN under s.  50 of the 
Indian Act  were unsuccessful, Canada could have proceeded through a taking under 
s. 48. However, given the impact of the flooding on the LSFN, Cabinet would have had 
to seriously c onsider how to fulfill Canada’s fiduciary duty in the context of an 
expropriation. In a memorandum from May 1929, Mr. Bury suggested that exclusive 
trapping rights would have to be given to the LSFN, at least for a period of time, while 
the Deputy Superint endent General suggested allocating hunting and fishing grounds 
elsewhere. Cabinet may have decided, for example, to set aside additional reserve land 
or fishing or harvesting rights for the LSFN in addition to providing financial 
compensation. Even in an expropriation, Canada was required to preserve the LSFN’s 
interest in the land to the greatest extent possible and should have secured 
compensation for the LSFN that reflected the nature of the interest, the impact on the 
community, and the value of the la nd to the Project.  
[114]  In sum, the trial judge was correct that Canada’s fiduciary obligations to 
the LSFN included a duty of loyalty and good faith; a duty to provide full disclosure 
and to consult with the LSFN; a duty to act with ordinary prudence with a v iew to its 
best interests; and a duty to protect and preserve the LSFN’s proprietary interest in the 
Reserve from exploitation. If Canada pursued a negotiated surrender, it would have to 
advance the best interests of the LSFN and protect it from an improvi dent bargain. In 
an expropriation, Canada would also have to minimally impair the protected interest. 
However, the duty to preserve and protect the LSFN’s sui generis interest in the 
Reserve is not satisfied by the application of expropriation principles. Instead, given  
 the nature of the interest and the harm to the LSFN, Canada was obligated to negotiate 
in order to secure compensation reflecting that impact and the value of the land for its 
anticipated use — hydroelectricity generation. It should have neg otiated for the best 
possible compensation. Canada breached this obligation.  
(3) The Loss  
[115]  The value of the loss flows from the nature of the breach and the obligations 
that the fiduciary should have fulfilled. The valuation of the loss must reflect Canada’s 
obligation to negotiate compensation based upon the best price that could have been 
obtained for the land’s use for hydroelectricity generation.  
[116]  Here, the trial judge valued the land as bushland and waterfront land. His 
assessment of equitable compensation flows from his conclusion that expropriation was 
permitted under the Indian Act  and that Canada would likely have compensated on the 
basis of expropriation law, excluding the value of the land as water storage for the 
Project itself. This improper conclusi on underlies the trial judge’s rejection of the 
Appellant’s proposed methods of valuation at trial.  
[117]  At trial, the Appellant primarily relied on the hypothetical of a revenue -
sharing agreement as the best valuation, but its experts also put forward additio nal 
models for evaluating the lost opportunity, including contemporaneous agreements 
reached with another First Nation. Canada’s experts put forward evidence regarding 
the expropriation value. The trial judge rejected any valuation greater than a  
 hypotheti cal flowage easement based upon the limited value that expropriation law 
would have permitted.  
[118]  I have already determined that equitable compensation in this case should 
have been assessed on the basis that Canada was under an obligation to negotiate in 
order to obtain the best possible compensation based upon the value of the land to the 
Project. The question is how to assess this value.  
(a) Application of Equitable Compensation Principles  
[119]  Before considering how to value the LSFN’s lost opportunity, it is 
neces sary to clarify how the principles of equitable compensation apply in this appeal.  
[120]  First, in my view, the trial judge was correct in assessing compensation on 
the basis of what would have happened at the time of breach had Canada fulfilled its 
fiduciary duty. Unlike Guerin , this is not a case in which the plaintiff is advancing 
different , more valuable uses of the land than the use that the land was actually put to. 
Instead, the Appellant submits that the land should be valued on the basis of its actual 
use as flooded land for hydroelectricity generation and that this is the most valuable  
use. In other words, the loss is the lost opportunity to negotiate compensation for the 
land’s use for hydroelectricity generation, not as the opportunity to put the land to other 
uses since 1929. Because of the presumption of highest and best use, there may be cases 
where a First Nation seeks compensation for other valuable uses even where it was  
 inevitable that the land would have been used for a public work. However, in this case, 
the focus is on the use that the land was actually put to.  
[121]  There were two  options available to Canada: a negotiated surrender under 
s. 51 and a taking under s.  48. Canada concedes that the lost opportunity in this case 
includes the opportunity to negotiate a surrender. Similarly, the trial judge accepted 
that Canada should have  attempted to negotiate a surrender before pursuing a taking 
(para.  322). In my view, equitable compensation should be assessed on the basis of a 
negotiated surrender. A negotiated surrender more clearly aligns with the nature of the 
breach, which included  a failure to keep the LSFN informed and a failure to prevent 
the Project from proceeding until the negotiation for compensation had been resolved. 
As Rowe  J. recently emphasized in a different context, negotiation can foster 
reconciliation ( Desautel , at paras. 87-91). Compensation was based on negotiated 
agreements with non -Indigenous parties, including the Hudson’s Bay Company and the 
Anglican Church Missionary Society, even though Canada and Ontario owed no 
fiduciary duty to those parties.  
[122]  The presumptio n of most favourable use and valuable accounting also 
allows equitable compensation to focus on a successful negotiation in this case. The 
presumption focuses on choices that would be available to the beneficiary in a non -
breach world, thus maintaining the  causal connection. For example, equity presumes 
that the beneficiary would have sold securities at their highest value or developed land 
in the most advantageous way ( Guerin , at p. 362). Here, Canada should have negotiated  
 compensation for the LSFN for th e best possible price, which in this case was the value 
of the land to the Project, without the limitations of expropriation law. Equity can 
presume  that the LSFN would have consented to a negotiated settlement at the best 
price the Crown could have realis tically obtained at the time. But the trial judge must 
determine what the highest value of the land to the Project realistically was in 1929. As 
I will explain below, that value of the compensation that Canada should have negotiated 
for the LSFN is not det ermined based on an evidentiary presumption. It is based on 
evidence that was available to the trial judge, such as comparable agreements with 
another First Nation.  
[123]  As the trial judge correctly noted, equitable compensation is a discretionary 
remedy that is assessed and not precisely calculated (para. 465, citing Whitefish Lake , 
at para.  90). It is unlikely that the trial judge could recreate with mathematical precision 
what would have happened nearly a century ago had Canada fulfilled its duty. Instead, 
a trial judge will often have to provide a global assessment of the lost oppo rtunity and 
that assessment needs to be realistic. This will often require that the trial judge assess 
various hypotheticals or proxies for that value.  
[124]  In my view, the benefit of hindsight also has a narrow application in this 
case, as noted by Gleason J. A. (C.A. reasons, at para. 60). The benefit of hindsight 
simply means that equitable compensation is not limited by foreseeability ( Canson , at 
p. 555). As an illustrative example, the benefit of hindsight would be highly relevant if 
the trial judge had det ermined that the lost opportunity included the opportunity to  
 receive an equity interest in the Project had Canada fulfilled its obligations. Following 
the example from Guerin , that interest would be valued at the date of trial on the basis 
of facts known at trial — such as the development of additional power sites — that 
were not foreseeable at the time of breach but would clearly impact the value of any 
ownership interest in the Project. However, the benefit of hindsight does not aid in 
determining whethe r an equity interest is part of the lost opportunity in the first place. 
Again, the trial judge must rely on evidence to assess the value of the land to the Project 
at the time of breach.  
[125]  Finally, the Appellant submits that Canada has an ongoing fiduciary duty 
in respect of the Reserve land because the land was never lawfully taken and the third 
party use of the land cannot be undone. For the Appellant, the fact that the land was 
flooded without legal authorization appears to be relevant to the assessment o f 
equitable compensation because it means that the ongoing nature of the breach must 
also be compensated.  
[126]  I agree that Canada has an ongoing fiduciary duty in respect of the Reserve 
land. However, in my view, characterizing the breach as ongoing does not affect the 
assessment of compensation in the way the Appellant suggests. The ongoing dimension 
of a breach is accommodated in a number of ways in equity. Properly understood, the 
presumptions of most favourable use and the benefit of hindsight recognize th e ongoing 
dimension of the lost opportunity. If, for example, the beneficiary was deprived of the 
opportunity to put an interest to another use, equity already adopts the perspective that  
 the interest is back in the hands of the beneficiary  and then consid ers the most 
advantageous use to which the beneficiary would have put the interest between breach 
and trial. This was explained in Re Dawson , at p.  406, and adopted by Wilson J. in 
Guerin , at pp. 361 -62: 
The obligation to restore to the estate the assets o f which he deprived it 
necessarily connotes that, where a monetary compensation is to be paid in 
lieu of restoring assets, that compensation is to be assessed by reference to 
the value of the assets at the date of restoration and not at the date of 
depriva tion. In this sense the obligation is a continuing one and ordinarily, 
if the assets are for some reason not restored in specie, it will fall for 
quantification at the date when recoupment is to be effected, and not 
before.  [Emphasis added.]  
[127]  Focusing on t he lawfulness of the taking would not modify or aid the 
analysis of the value of the LSFN’s lost opportunity. The central inquiry remains: what 
is the measure of the plaintiff’s lost opportunity in light of the breach? The lost 
opportunity at issue in this  case is the opportunity to negotiate a surrender reflecting 
the highest value of the land, which was its anticipated use for hydroelectricity 
generation. This is the obligation that Canada failed to meet. The fact that Canada also 
failed to meet its oblig ation to comply with the provisions in the Indian Act  does not 
ultimately change the value of that lost opportunity.  
[128]  This is not to suggest that the lawfulness of the taking should have no 
impact on the assessment of equitable compensation. Equitable comp ensation must 
fulfill the deterrent objectives of equity. Deterrence, in this context, aims at the 
fundamental goal of reconciliation and upholds the honour of the Crown. The  
 lawfulness of the taking could inform whether the award  — in addition to 
compensa ting for the value of the lost opportunity — fulfills the deterrent function of 
equity.  
[129]  In conclusion, the LSFN is entitled to compensation for the lost opportunity 
to negotiate a surrender of the flooded land based on its value to hydroelectricity 
generat ion. This requires the trial judge to presume that the Project would have moved 
forward and that Canada would have fulfilled its fiduciary obligation at that time by 
ensuring the best possible compensation for the LSFN based on the value of the land 
to the  Project.  
(b) Valuing the Lost Opportunity  
[130]  The issue remains how to assess compensation based on the lost 
opportunity to negotiate a surrender reflecting the value of the land to the Project. In 
valuing the lost opportunity, the trial judge must assume that Ca nada fulfilled the 
fiduciary obligations required in a negotiated surrender, including the obligations to 
keep the LSFN fully informed, advance its best interests, and protect it from an 
improvident bargain.  
[131]  The Appellant submits that, because we know the use the land was put to, 
it was inappropriate for the trial judge to consider a hypothetical  surrender or 
expropriation to assess the value of that use. I cannot agree. While there is only one 
proposed use of the land, the trial judge still has to determin e how to value that use and  
 the valuation must be causally connected to the breach of Canada’s obligations. 
Because the LSFN is to be compensated for the land’s value to the Project, on the basis 
that it was going forward, the trial judge must consider how  Canada could have 
proceeded to fulfill its duty. The error in the trial judge’s reasons is not that he 
considered hypotheticals to value the lost opportunity, but that he relied on a 
hypothetical expropriation that would not have fulfilled Canada’s fiduci ary obligations.  
[132]  The trial judge should account for any uncertainty or realistic 
contingencies in assessing the evidence regarding the value of the land in a negotiated 
surrender. The idea of realistic contingencies, which was accepted by this Court in 
Guerin, simply reinforces the principle that the loss must be caused in fact by the 
breach. The trial judge has to be satisfied that the lost opportunity represents what could 
have happened had Canada fulfilled its obligations. It does not mean, as Canada 
suggests, that the fiduciary obligations themselves can be defined according to what 
realistically would have happened. The fiduciary obligations must always be defined 
first, and then the trial judge assesses reasonable, or realistic, outcomes in light of th ose 
obligations. As Gleason J.A. correctly noted, the trial judge must take into account 
“events that could have occurred had the fiduciary duty not been breached and that 
might have increased (or decreased) the value of what the beneficiary lost as a resu lt of 
the breach” (C.A. reasons, at para. 82).  
[133]   At trial, the Appellant led evidence from the Kananaskis Falls Projects that 
showed that negotiations in comparable projects led to substantial compensation based  
 upon the lands’ “usefulness in connection wit h the development of power”. The trial 
judge rejected this evidence and did not assess any value for the lost opportunity to 
negotiate.   
[134]   In my view, the evidence from the Kananaskis Falls Projects was relevant 
to the assessment of loss in this case. The trial judge distinguished this evidence based 
on one factor: Calgary Power could not expropriate the land for the Kananaskis Falls 
Projects, but Canada could expropriate the land for this Project. However, this factor is 
not material. What is relevant is t hat Canada, the fiduciary , had an obligation to get the 
best value for the land’s intended use, notwithstanding its legal power to expropriate. 
With respect to the Kananaskis Falls Projects, Canada insisted that Calgary Power 
negotiate agreements with the First Nation reflecting the value of its lands to the 
project. In this Project, Canada did not do so.  
[135]  Canada submits that the Court should defer to the trial judge’s findings on 
the Kananaskis Falls Projects. However, but for the legal determination that Canada 
was under no legal duty to compensate for more than an expropriation, the trial judge’s 
factual findings support  the view that the Kananaskis Falls Projects were relevant to 
the valuation of the flooded lands in this case.  
[136]  The Appellant led evidenc e at trial regarding the compensation that Canada 
negotiated on behalf of the Stoney Indian Band for the Kananaskis Falls Projects:   
  Horseshoe Falls 1909:  Calgary Power purchased 1,000 acres at $10 per acre 
plus a perpetual lease for $1,500 per year;  
 Kanana skis Falls 1914:  The pre -project value of the land was $5 to $7 per acre, 
but Canada requested payment of either $320 to $360 per acre, as a one -time 
payment, or an annual rent plus $60 to $90 per acre as a one -time payment to 
reflect the value of the land  to the project. This is a very substantial premium 
on the traditional use valuation of the land. Calgary Power ultimately agreed to 
pay $9,000 for 93.85 acres ($95.90 per acre) plus $1,500 annually;  
 Ghost River 1929:  Calgary Power agreed to pay $21,200 fo r 1,324.3 acres of 
land ($16.00 per acre) plus 50 percent of the water power in rental fees.  
[137]  The trial judge made three relevant findings based on these projects: (1) 
hydroelectric benefits to the First Nation were allocated on the basis of the dam 
locatio n, not on the basis of the lands flooded to create the water reservoir; (2) flooded 
lands were compensated at a fixed one -time price per acre; (3) the value of the flooded 
lands was not based on their value as agricultural lands but on their “usefulness in  
connection with the development of the power” (para. 345). Based on this, the trial 
judge determined that the LSFN would have been compensated with a one -time 
payment because the water power site was not located on the Reserve. However, when 
the trial jud ge assessed the value of that payment, he did not provide compensation for 
the value of the land to the Project for only one reason: Canada could expropriate the  
 LSFN’s land and was not required to do anything more. This is contrary to the approach 
taken i n Kananaskis Falls where Canada sought compensation for the flooded lands’ 
“considerable value” in connection with the development of hydroelectricity. Absent 
this error, the trial judge’s findings established that the flooded land was valued based 
on its usefulness to the project.  
[138]  Obviously, these agreements provide relevant historical evidence of how 
much of a premium on the undeveloped value of the land may be warranted in this case. 
This is not to suggest that there is no basis upon which to distinguis h the various 
agreements reached in the Kananaskis Falls Projects as they relate to the valuation of 
the loss caused by Canada’s failure to negotiate. It is up to the trial judge to assess how 
the differences in the location of the dam, or the amount of la nd involved, or the nature 
of the impact on the First Nation, would impact the value of the land for flooding 
purposes. Here, the trial judge determined that the evidence from the Kananaskis Falls 
Projects did not support a yearly rental agreement for the LSFN because the power site 
was not located on the Reserve. However, in assessing a lost opportunity to negotiate,  
the trial judge must consider all factors that would distinguish the Kananaskis Falls 
Projects from this Project, including the fact that the  LSFN was contributing a 
significantly greater amount of land than the Stoney Indian Band had.  
[139]  The trial judge had other proxies for measuring the value of the land to the 
Project. For example, the LSFN led evidence regarding the value of a land lease. In  that 
model, the LSFN’s expert, Arthur J. Hosios, valued the lost opportunity if the flooded  
 land had been rented for comparable Treaty 3 rates since the time of breach. The land 
lease model assumed the flooded land would be rented for $1.97 an acre beginn ing in 
1929 and, adjusted only for inflation, produced a value of $149,023,172 at the time of 
trial (although the model assumed 14,891 acres of flooded land instead of the 11,304 
acres agreed at trial). At the very least, these values could have impacted C anada’s 
negotiating position on behalf of the LSFN. It was also open to the trial judge to 
consider the evidence from later agreements where Canada was clearly fulfilling its 
obligations as a fiduciary.  
[140]  The trial judge should also give appropriate weight to the evidence 
regarding the impact on the community and the LSFN’s perspective. A relevant factor 
to a negotiated surrender is clearly the impact on the First Nation and the importance 
of the land to th e First Nation. Negotiations are not one -sided and the LSFN’s 
perspective is an important consideration. And, if we presume that Canada had fulfilled 
its fiduciary obligations, the LSFN would have gone into the negotiations fully 
informed of the significan t value of its land to the Project and the anticipated impact 
on its communities.  
[141]  Canada submits that even if it had been under an obligation to negotiate for 
the value of the land to the Project, it would be improper to compensate the LSFN on 
this basis because there is no evidence that Ontario or Manitoba would have been 
willing to pay more than the expropriation value. On this view, any compensation in  
 excess of expropriation principles is not caused by the breach and does not represent 
an opportunity t he LSFN lost.  
[142]  I cannot agree. The LSFN cannot provide evidence showing definitively 
what level of compensation Ontario, Manitoba, or Canada would have agreed to in 
1929 had Canada made it clear that the Project would be delayed until the issue of 
compensat ion was resolved. The LSFN cannot prove what compensation could  have 
been negotiated precisely because Canada failed to fulfill its fiduciary duty. Additional 
useful evidence that could inform the level of compensation that Ontario or Manitoba 
would have a ccepted could include the Kananaskis Falls Projects, the economic 
fundamentals of the Project, and the anticipated benefit that the provinces stood to 
receive from the Project. The LSFN did advance evidence at trial showing how cost -
effective the Project w as and the incredible economic advantages that it conferred on 
Ontario and Manitoba. The evidence shows that the parties were very motivated to 
finish this Project and realize its economic benefits. For example, in the 1930s, Canada 
spent over $850,000 on a failed timber clearing project to advance the Project and 
resolve an impasse with Ontario.  
[143]  Thus, equitable compensation must reflect Canada’s obligation to ensure 
the LSFN was compensated for the value of the land to the Project given the nature of 
the interest and the impact on the LSFN. The trial judge should have considered the 
Kananaskis Falls Projects and other evidence available at trial as relevant proxies for  
 what this premium was worth. The trial judge also had evidence at trial regarding 
agreeme nts that were reached with another First Nation.  
[144]  After assessing the lost opportunity, the trial judge must determine whether 
the new total compensation award is sufficient to fulfill the deterrent function of equity 
(Hodgkinson , at p. 453). Deterrence ha s special importance in this case because 
deterring the Crown from breaching its fiduciary duty encourages it to act honourably 
and orients it towards the ongoing project of reconciliation. As this Court stated in 
Williams Lake , the just resolution of clai ms arising from the Crown’s failure to honour 
its obligations is essential to reconciliation (para. 2). Given the facts of this case, 
including Canada’s “inexplicable” conduct, the fact the land was never legally 
surrendered or taken, and the significant h arm to the LSFN, the trial judge must 
seriously consider whether the total award will be an effective deterrent, thus reflecting 
the honour of the Crown and the goal of reconciliation.  
[145]  In conclusion, the assessment of the lost opportunity was flawed becau se 
it was based on an incorrect view of what the fiduciary duty required. By valuing the 
loss as the amount required under expropriation law, the trial judge failed to account 
for a fiduciary obligation to negotiate for compensation reflecting the LSFN’s i nterest 
in the Reserve land, impact on the community, and the value of the land given its 
intended use as water storage for hydroelectricity generation. As a result, the 
assessment of the value of the flooded land must be reassessed. The trial judge’s 
assessment of other losses were not challenged in this appeal. Similarly, I take no issue  
 with the manner in which the trial judge brought forward historic losses to present 
value.  
IV. Conclusion  
[146]  A hypothetical flowage easement at $1.29 an acre is not an appropri ate 
measure of compensation in this case because it does not reflect the value of the land 
to the Project. The sole basis for this valuation is the conclusion that because the Project 
was a public work, and Canada could have expropriated the land, Canada w as not 
expected to secure compensation for the LSFN reflecting the value of its land to the 
Project. I cannot agree. As I have explained, this approach is inconsistent with the 
unique nature of the Indigenous interest in reserve land and the devastating im pact of 
the flooding on the LSFN. It does not reflect the honour of the Crown nor serve the 
overarching goal of reconciliation. The LSFN is entitled to equitable compensation for 
the lost opportunity to negotiate for an agreement reflecting the value of th e land to the 
hydroelectricity generation Project.  
[147]  The award for equitable compensation must be returned for reassessment 
in accordance with these reasons. I would allow the appeal with costs to the Appellant 
throughout. I would set aside the judgment of t he Court of Appeal and the trial judge’s 
award of equitable damages and return that question to the trial court for reassessment.  
  
 The following are the reasons delivered by  
 
 CÔTÉ  J. —  
[148]  Canada breached its fiduciary duty to Lac Seul First Nation (“LSFN”) 
when it unlawfully allowed the flooding of over 11,000  acres (or approximately 
4575  hectares) of LSFN reserve lands for a hydroelectric project that was completed in 
1929 (“Project”). The flooding had devastating effects on LSFN, including the 
complete dep rivation of the use and benefit of a large part of its reserve. Canada did 
not obtain the right to flood the lands through either of the two routes established by 
the Indian Act , R.S.C.  1927, c.  98, as it read in 1929: it neither sought LSFN’s consent 
to surrender the lands, nor did it expropriate the lands.  
[149]  No party to this appeal questions this reality. Canada acknowledges its 
breach of fiduciary duty and its “inexplicabl e” hi storical treatment of the a ppellants, 
and rightly so. The question , then, is how to compensate for the harms caused by 
Canada’s breach in a manner that accords with settled equitable compensation 
principles. The  appellants contest the basis upon which the trial judge calculated an 
aspect of the equitable compensation he awarded, namely the value attributed to the 
flooded land s (2017 FC 906, [2018] 4 C.N.L.R. 63) . Canada submits that , to the extent 
that a financial award can accomplish it, the amount  awarded  by the trial judge for the 
fair market value of the flooded lands , in combination with the award for  
non-calculable losses , fairly and reasonably compensate s the a ppellants for their losses.   
 [150]  Both the majority judges and the dissenting judge at the Federal  Court of 
Appeal were in complete agreement on two issues (2019 FCA 171, [2020] 1 F.C.R. 
745). First, the Court of Appeal unanimously found that the trial judge correctly held 
that there was no basis to award compensation for loss of a revenue -sharing agre ement 
and that the trial judge made no palpable and overriding error in concluding that the 
Lac Seul situation was not comparable to the other revenue -sharing situations on which 
the appellants relied . Second, w ith respect to the trial judge’s conclusions on one -time 
compensation for the loss of the flooded land s, the Court of Appeal agreed that there 
was no error of law or palpable and overriding error in the trial judge’s conclusion that, 
had Canada expropriated the flooded land s in 1929, it would not hav e paid more than 
the fair market value of $1.29 per acre. The sole disagreement between the majority 
and the dissent concern ed the  appellant s’ second submission regarding the trial judge’s 
conclusions on one -time compensation , namely that he had  erred in d istinguishing the 
Kananaskis Falls development project (“Kananaskis Project”) from the Lac Seul 
situation.  
[151]  However, my colleagues in the majority go further than the Court of 
Appeal, seemingly undertaking a fresh equitable compensation analysis. The major ity 
does not agree with the trial judge’s assessment of equitable compensation, not because 
of any palpable and overriding error that he committed, but because his assessment 
does not accord with the majority’s view that LSFN is entitled to equitable 
compe nsation for the lost opportunity to negotiate an agreement reflecting the value of  
 the lands for hydroelectric purposes specifically, as opposed to equitable compensation 
for the lost opportunity to negotiate generally.  
[152]  The value of the compensation that Canada should have negotiated for 
LSFN cannot be determined  in an evidentiary or factual vacuum , and it is improper to 
fault a trier of fact regarding possible alternative findings based on a newly raised 
theory of the case. That is not the proper standard  of appellate review.  In my view, the 
majority of the Federal Court of Appeal was correct to find that there was no basis to 
interfere with the trial judge’s equitable compensation assessment. As I will explain 
below, the trial judge assessed compensation for the value of the flooded lands in 1929  
based on a thorough  examination of the facts  as established in the record . I find no  
reviewable  error  in the trial judge’s analysis, and I would dismiss the appeal.  
I. Standard of Review  
[153]  While the majority largely refrains from discussing the applicable standard 
of review, the parties took opposing positions concerning the proper standard for 
questions related to the trial judge’s compensation assessment. Therefore, clear 
guidance on this point ought to be provided.  
[154]  Appellate review of an award of damages is to be conducted in accordance 
with the standards of review articulated in Housen v. Nikolaisen , 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 
2 S.C.R. 235. The appellants submit that  the errors in this case relate to the failure of 
the co urts below to correctly apply the legal principles they identified , and therefore  
 should be assessed on a correctness standard. The respondent submits that the issues 
raised by the appellants are matters of mixed fact and law and that there are no 
extricab le questions of law to which the standard of correctness applies.  
[155]  Both parties rely on the same passage from Whitefish Lake Band of Indians 
v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2007 ONCA 744, 87 O.R. (3d) 321, at para.  28, 
although the respondent emphasizes the f irst sentence and the appellants focus on the 
second:  
A trial judge’s damages or compensation assessment is entitled to 
considerable deference on appeal. An appellate court should interfere with 
that assessment only if it is tainted by an error in principle, or is 
unreasonably high or low.  
[156]  A similar pronouncement was made by Justice Wilson in Guerin v. The 
Queen , [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335, at p.  363: “.  . . I do not think it is the function of this Court 
to interfere with the quantum of damages awarded by  the trial judge if no error in 
principle  in determining the measure of damages has been demonstrated. .  . . The trial 
judge’s task was not an easy one but I think he ‘did the best he could’  . . . .” 
[157]  Thus, the question to be decided is whether the assessme nt is tainted by a 
reviewable error. The appellants attempt to get around this exacting standard by 
asserting that the courts below erred in “apprehending how the assessment of equitable 
compensation should be carried out”, which they suggest is an “extric able question of 
principle or pure law [that is] reviewable on a correctness standard” (A.F., at para.  72).  
 I disagree. Not only is the trial judge’s determination that the appellants should have 
been compensated through a one -time payment in 1929 based on  an expropriation 
model in accordance with the Indian Act not an extricable error, and thus not reviewable 
on a correctness standard, but the appellants have also not identified any particular 
findings of fact by the trial judge as constituting a palpable and overriding error.  
[158]  Under the standard of review for questions of mixed fact and law, “an 
appellate court’s role is not to reconsider the evidence globally and reach its own 
conclusions, but simply to ensure that the trial judge’s conclusions  — includin g the 
trial judge’s legal inferences  — are supported by the evidence” ( Modern Cleaning 
Concept Inc. v. Comité paritaire de l’entretien d’édifices publics de la région de 
Québec , 2019 SCC 28, [2019] 2 S.C.R. 406, at para.  69). “The possibility of alternativ e 
findings based on different ascriptions of weight is .  . . [not a] basis for overturning the 
findings of a fact -finder” ( Nelson (City) v. Mowatt , 2017 SCC 8, [2017] 1 S.C.R. 138, 
at para.  38). Appellate intervention is not warranted “absent an error that  is ‘plainly 
seen’ and has affected the result” (para.  38, quoting Housen , at para.  6).  
[159]  Even if an appellate court might have come to a different conclusion, it 
cannot overturn the trial judge’s discretionary decision unless a reviewable error has 
been ma de. As noted by Stratas  J.A. in Mahjoub v. Canada (Citizenship and 
Immigration) , 2017 FCA 157, [2018] 2 F.C.R. 344:  
Palpable and overriding error is often best defined by describing what it 
is not. If an appellate court had a free hand, it might weigh the evidence 
differently and come to a different result. It might be inclined to draw  
 different inferences or see different factual implications from the evidence. 
But these things, without more, do not rise to the level of palpable and 
overriding error. [para . 70] 
[160]  In my view, the trial judge made no reviewable errors. The majority of the 
Federal Court of Appeal properly applied the deferential standard of review, holding 
that there was no basis to interfere with the trial judge’s factual findings. The alleged 
errors raised before this Court relate to questions of fact and mixed fact and law, and 
the appellants have not demonstrated that the trial judge made any palpable and 
overriding errors. The trial judge properly reviewed and assessed  the voluminous 
quantit ies of evidence. His legal inferences are supported by the evidence. Therefore, 
the appellants have not established a basis for interfering with his valuation.   
II. The Trial Judge’s Equitable Compensation Assessment  
[161]  The principles of equitable compensation, i ncluding the special importance 
of its deterrent effect in furthering the ongoing project of reconciliation between 
Canada and Indigenous peoples, are settled and not at issue in this appeal. It is the 
application of those principles that is at issue. Ther efore, it is important to begin by 
outlining the trial judge’s assessment. In his decision, the trial judge made it clear that 
the goal of equitable compensation is to restore what the plaintiff has lost due to a 
breach of fiduciary duty, the loss being an  opportunity not realized because of the 
breach. The plaintiff’s loss arising from the breach is to be assessed with the advantage 
of hindsight, not based on what may have been known at the date of the breach or what 
would have been reasonably foreseeable.  In assessing the loss, courts must assume both  
 that the plaintiff would have made the most favourable use of the trust property at issue 
and that the defendant, had it not committed the breach, would have carried out its 
duties vis -à-vis the plaintiff in a lawful manner (Trial Reasons, at para.  285).  
[162]  The trial judge applied these settled principles, specifically looking back to 
when the breach occurred in 1929, and, with the benefit of hindsight and the evidentiary 
record, assessed what position the appell ants would have been in but for the breach. 
Based on the evidence, the trial judge determined that, had Canada acted legally, it 
would have taken the reserve lands in 1929 through expropriation or surrender 
(para.  358).  
[163]  The trial judge noted the public imp ortance of the Project and held that 
“[t]here is no reasonable likelihood that the project would have been shelved had the 
LSFN or Indian Affairs refused to have the land flooded” (paras.  292 and 327; see also 
C.A. Reasons, at paras.  23 and 50, per Gleason  J.A., dissenting, but not on this point). 
Having found that the Project and the resulting flooding would have occurred when 
they did, the trial judge presumed that Canada would have acted lawfully if it had not 
breached its fiduciary duty and determined t hat Canada would have, and should have, 
either obtained a surrender of the reserve lands to be flooded as provided for in Treaty 
No. 3 (1873) and ss.  50 and 51 of the Indian Act , or expropriated the necessary lands 
in accordance with Treaty 3 and s.  48 of the Indian Act . In either case, Canada would 
have compensated the appellants for the flooded lands in 1929, the year of the dam’s  
 construction (Trial Reasons, at paras.  350-71). The parties accept this finding (C.A. 
Reasons, at para.  50). 
[164]  The evidence prof fered at trial focused broadly on two concepts: a revenue - 
or benefit -sharing agreement and one -time compensation for the loss of the flooded 
lands. The trial judge rejected the revenue -sharing agreement as unprecedented and 
inconsistent with the historica l approach taken in other instances of reserve land 
compensation, and found that there was no evidence that the parties would have been 
amenable to such an arrangement (paras.  351-57). The Federal Court of Appeal 
unanimously upheld this finding (paras.  57 and 106 -7).  
[165]  Therefore, the trial judge concluded that Canada would have compensated 
the appellants through a one -time payment for the flooded lands and would not have 
secured an indefinite revenue -sharing agreement. In order to assess the quantum of the 
one-time compensation for the loss of the flooded lands, the trial judge reviewed all 
evidence proffered at trial on how to value the lands. He noted that the question of how 
the fair market value was to be assessed had been discussed by two experts: 
Duncan  Bell, called jointly by Canada and Ontario, and Norris Wilson, called by the 
appellants.  Both experts agreed that the fair market value had to be assessed on the 
basis of the highest and best use of the lands (D.  Bell, Appraisal Report: Lac Seul First 
Nation — Southwind Action , February  28, 2014, at p.  78, reproduced in A.R. Supp., 
vol. CCXLI, at p.  168; N.  Wilson, Technical Review of an Appraisal Report  by:  
 Charles Bell Real Estate Appraisals Ltd. , May 16, 2016, at p.  2, reproduced in A.R. 
Supp., vol.  CCX XXV, at p.  320).  
[166]  In his appraisal report, Mr.  Bell stated that prior to 1934, the highest and 
best use of the Lac Seul reserve lands would have been for continued traditional uses 
by LSFN, and it would be expected that the majority of the flooded lands wou ld have 
remained vacant and unimproved. Mr.  Bell stated that when flooding of the reserve 
lands occurred in order to accommodate the development of a hydroelectric dam “the 
flooded lands had a greater utility as flooded land rather than their previous use”  (p. 79). 
He estimated the value of the subject lands as at April  1, 1929, April  1, 1934, and 
April  1, 1943, in accordance with Canada and Ontario’s terms of reference. In 
Mr. Bell’s opinion, the overall effective price per acre of the reserve lands was $1 .29 
in 1929, $1.06 in 1934, and $1.24 in 1943. In his testimony, Mr.  Bell noted that he had 
valued the land as unflooded in each of the years for which he provided an estimated 
value because, if he had valued them differently once they were flooded, “[t]ha t would 
be like somebody damaging your car and say, yes, I owe you a newer car but your car’s 
damaged now so I’m only going to pay you for the damaged car. So the valuations for 
traditional uses were simply just brought forward in those dates based on the market 
changes and the market evidence” (A.R. Supp., vol.  XV, at p.  247).  
[167]  Mr. Wilson criticized Mr.  Bell on three points: (1) a failure to correctly 
apply the principle of highest and best use; (2) the decision to apply the direct 
comparison approach; and (3) a failure to make findings and assumptions consistent  
 with the historical record. Mr.  Wilson found that while Mr.  Bell had acknowledged that 
the highest and best use of the lands had changed once it was flooded, all three of his 
valuations, for 1929, 1 934, and 1943, were almost identical. From Mr.  Wilson’s 
perspective, either Mr.  Bell had not made any attempt to analyze the impact of the 
hydroelectric project on the value of the reserve lands, or he had concluded that the 
project had no impact on the va lue of the lands. Regardless, Mr.  Wilson submitted that 
Mr. Bell’s highest and best use analysis was unsound. As the trial judge summarized:  
. . . in his view, the flooded Reserve land formed part of a storage project 
that facilitated a hydroelectric syste m down the English and Winnipeg 
Rivers. He testified that the hydroelectric project at Ear Falls would affect 
the value of the land around the foreshore of Lac Seul, because the highest 
and best use of that land would change to the storage of water for the  power 
project from traditional uses before it was flooded. [para.  377] 
However, both in his report and his testimony, Mr.  Wilson did not propose an 
alternative valuation.  
[168]  The trial judge found that Mr.  Bell’s method of valuation was “appropriate 
and prope r in the circumstances” and adopted his conclusions (para.  380). He noted 
that “[t]his manner of proceeding may seem contrary to that advanced by Indian Affairs 
in the Kananaskis Falls development where, it will be recalled, the Department 
informed Calgary  Power that the cost of the land must exceed its agricultural value as 
the ‘value in the lands consists in their usefulness in connection with the development 
of power at Kananaskis Falls and in this connection they have a considerable value’” 
(para.  381, referring to A.R. Supp., vol.  XLI, at p.  184). However, the trial judge  
 distinguished the Kananaskis Project on the basis that there was no ability to 
expropriate any reserve lands in that example, whereas there was in the instant case. 
Therefore, Calgary Power was in an entirely different position vis -à-vis the Stoney 
Indian Band than Canada vis -à-vis the LSFN reserve (paras.  382-83). 
[169]  In determining the price per acre, the trial judge rejected Canada’s 
submission that $1.00 per acre would be a more appropr iate basis to calculate the 
amount payable. He held that “[w]hile $1.29 is slightly more than may have been in 
the contemplation of [Manitoba and Ontario, the provinces with whom Canada was 
negotiating], I have no evidence that had Canada insisted, it woul d not have been 
accepted by the Provinces” (para.  384). The trial judge considered additional avoidable 
losses, finding calculable financial losses of $14,582.16 in 1929 for a flowage easement 
over the reserve lands, $34,917.33 in 1929 for timber dues, and  $1,750,000 in 2008 for 
community infrastructure (para.  443). In addition, the trial judge awarded $16.2  million 
for non -calculable losses, namely loss of livelihood both on and off the reserve as well 
as loss of easy shore access, damage to boats, and ove rall damage to the aesthetic of 
the lake shore.  
III. The Appellants Were Fairly and Appropriately Compensated for Their Losses  
[170]  The appellants submit that the lower courts improperly applied the 
principles of equitable compensation and failed to compensate LSFN for what it 
actually lost. According to them, “[r]ather than compensating for those losses in light 
of the use to which the Lands have been put, the Courts re -wrote history and relied on  
 a fictional expropriation scenario to improperly approach LSFN’s loss es as if they were 
one-time lost expropriation funds” (para.  69). I cannot agree. Based on the evidence 
before him, the trial judge assessed the appellants’ losses presuming the highest and 
best use and with the benefit of hindsight. The appellants have no t identified or 
established any palpable and overriding errors.  
A. Defining and Valuing the Lost Opportunity  
[171]  I am in agreement with the majority that equitable compensation in this 
case should be assessed on the basis of a negotiated surrender (paras.  118 and 121). 
This is not controversial. Canada agrees that the lost opportunity in this case includes 
the opport unity to negotiate a surrender. The Court of Appeal unanimously agreed, 
finding that “the Federal Court  correctly identified the impact of the breaches of 
fiduciary duty committed by Canada as being  both the deprivation of an opportunity to 
negotiate a sur render of the flooded land in 1929 and the deprivation in 1929 of the 
funds that ought to have been paid had Canada taken and exercised the r ight to flood 
the reserve land” (para.  59 (emphasis in original) ). 
[172]  As a fiduciary, Canada was arguably required to pursue a negotiated 
surrender before proceeding to expropriation, as the former more closely aligns with 
the nature of the breach and probably would have been less detrimental to LSFN. 
However, it does not necessarily f ollow that the lost opportunity to ne gotiate a 
surrender of the lands to be flooded equates to a los t opportunity to negotiate a 
surrender of th ose lands for hydroelectricity generation . In my view, th e majority’s   
 characterization presupposes that the trial judge had the requisite factual bas is to make 
such a  finding. It is clear from the record that he did not.  
[173]  For the appellants to recover the value of a lost opportunity to negotiate a 
surrender for hydroelectric benefits specifically, they would have had to establish their 
entitlement through specific facts and evidence, including expert evidence, led at trial. 
They did not do so. As noted by the majority, the appellants’ theory of compensation 
has changed during this litigation. At trial, the appellants’ theory, and their expert 
valuat ion evidence, were focused on their revenue -sharing claims. They did not provide 
evidence regarding a one -time payment for the flooded lands for hydroelectric 
purposes, and chose to limit themselves to criticizing Canada’s expert valuation. 
Therefore, the trial judge was correct to find that the argument that Canada could, and 
should, have paid more than fair market value for the lands was “nothing more than 
optimistic speculation” (para.  383).  
[174]  The value of the compensation that Canada should have negotiate d for 
LSFN cannot be assessed in an evidentiary or factual vacuum. As I explain below, the 
trial judge determined the compensation for the flooded lands in 1929  based on a 
“meticulous examination of the facts” ( Hodgkinson v. Simms , [1994] 3 S.C.R. 377, at 
pp. 413-14, quoting National Westminster Bank plc v. Morgan , [1985] 1 All E.R. 821 
(H.L.), at p.  831). I find no palpable and overriding error.   
B. The Trial Judge’s Findings Are Not Tainted by Error   
 [175]  The trial judge’s findings regar ding what would have actually happened in 
1929 had Canad a not breached its duty to the a ppellants are factual determin ations, not 
legal ones. They were  based entirely on the evidence before him, including a lengthy 
historical record and numerous expert rep orts. As I outline below, I am of the view that 
the trial judge made no palpable and overriding error in his compensation assessment, 
and therefore deference is owed to his determination that $1.29 per acre in 1929  dollars 
was t he proper compensation for t he appellants’ flooded land s. 
(1) Kananaskis Project Example  
[176]  The majority takes issue with the trial judge’s assessment and ultimate 
rejection of the evidence from the Kananaskis Project agreements. In the majority’s 
view, that evidence was relevant to the ass essment of loss in this case, and the factor 
used by the trial judge to distinguish this example is not material.  
[177]  First, it is important to identify what evidence was actually proffered on 
this point. There was minimal discussion of this example in the rec ord. The extent of 
our knowledge is from the expert report addendum and testimony of 
Gwynneth  C. D. Jones and a brief response to Ms.  Jones’ addendum in 
Dr. Betsey  Baldwin’s expert report. In her addendum, Ms.  Jones discussed the process 
used to deal with the interests of the Stoney Indian Band in the course of the 
development of three hydroelectric power sites on the Bow River, including 
Kananaskis Falls. She outlined the specific instructions given by the Department of 
Indian Affairs to Calgary Power, the  dam’s proponent, to negotiate a resolution with  
 the Stoney Indian Band that resulted in a payment for the flooded lands in excess of 
their value as agricultural lands. In response to Ms.  Jones’ addendum, Dr.  Baldwin 
identified that Ms.  Jones did not provi de any comparison with the Lac Seul situation. 
Dr. Baldwin’s response noted two overarching differences: the hydro developments 
were differently situated in relation to the reserves and water -power in Ontario and 
Alberta was differently administered (B.  Baldwin, A History of the Lac Seul Storage 
Project, Flooding on the Lac Seul Indian Reserve No.  28, and Related Compensation 
to the Lac Seul Band, 1873 to 1943 , April  30, 2014, at p.  202, reproduced in 
A.R.  Supp., vol.  CCXXXIX, at p.  305).  
[178]  In her testimony, Ms. Jones summarized the differences between what 
happened at Lac Seul and what happened at Kananaskis Falls as follows:  
Well the most salient difference of course is the extent to which the 
Indian people were consulted. And not just consulted, but were as ked to 
give formal consent to the arrangements, to give consent to the taking of 
their reserve lands for the power sites, but also for the land to be flooded 
by the power site. The difference in the valuations of the land comments 
that it should be valued in terms of its value to the Stoney and also in terms 
of its value to the power site. In other words, that its value was intimately 
tied up with the fact that it was going to be part of what was necessary to 
generate revenue and power from these sites.  
 
Of course, the issue of heavy annual payments which would be made, 
as well as this upfront payment. In other words, that the Stoney people were 
to be offered a toll or dues on the power that was generated by the private 
company as a result of their being  — the private companies being able to 
flood Indian reserve land; that’s a salient difference. And of course, just 
the difference in relationship of the Department of Indian Affairs and even 
the Water Pow er Branch in these cases.  
 
(A.R. Supp., vol.  V, at pp.  69-70)  
 [179]  Additionally, Ms.  Jones noted that in the Kananaskis Project, there was an 
agreement between the Department of the Interior and Calgary Power that the 
“company will have the power to acquire and take [lands] for the purposes of its 
undertaking, esse ntially, powers the same as those conferred by the Railway Act on 
railway companies” (A.R. Supp., vol.  V, at p.  93), even though no formal expropriation 
occurred.  
[180]  While noting that there may be a basis upon which to distinguish this 
evidence as it relates to the valuation of the loss, the majority finds that “[t]he trial 
judge should have considered the Kananaskis Falls Projects and other evidence 
available at trial as relevant proxies for what [the] premium was worth” (para.  143). 
[181]  With respect, the majorit y’s analysis of this evidence seems to stray from 
the settled standards of appellate review and instead focuses on how the trial judge 
ought to have undertaken an assessment of the evidence. That is not this Court’s role. 
We must not reconsider the evidenc e globally and reach our own conclusions; our role 
is to ensure that there is no error in principle or overriding and palpable error in the trial 
judge’s conclusions.  
[182]  I am in agreement with the majority of the Court of Appeal that the limited 
evidence prof fered at trial  concerning  the Kananaskis Project does not substantiate a 
finding  that the trial judge made a palpable and overriding error in refusing to grant the 
appellants a sum in excess of the fair market value of $1.29 per acre. The trial judge’s 
determination regarding the compara bility of the Kananaskis P roject and the Lac Seul  
 situation is a factual determination. Based on his review of the evidence and Ms.  Jones’ 
testimony, he found that the Kananaskis Project could be distinguished in at least on e 
material respect: there was no ability to expropriate, and therefore “Calgary Power vis -
à-vis the Stoney Indian Band [was] in an entirely different position than Canada was 
vis-à-vis LSFN Reserve” (para.  382).  
[183]  The record before us provides no evidence a s to why Canada was not in a 
position to utilize its expropriation powers for the Kananaskis Project, and thus it is 
simply speculation to conclude that Canada’s differing approach in that matter leads, 
per se , to the conclusion that it breached its duty t owards the appellants in this case. It 
may be, as the majority of the Court of Appeal noted, “that the fact that the Kananaskis 
Project was located on the reserve led Indian Affairs to take the view that the Band’s 
land had a fair market value much greater  than its agricultural value, resulting in a 
payment of approximately $93.85 per acre of reserve land” (para.  138). It may also be, 
as the majority in this Court identifies, that a fundamental difference between the two 
projects is that in the Kananaskis P roject, the compensation included a one -time 
payment plus an annual water power rental payment.  
[184]  While my colleagues in the majority acknowledge that “[i]t is up to the trial 
judge to assess how the differences in the location of the dam, or the amount of land 
involved, or the nature of the impact on the First Nation, would impact the value of the 
land for flooding purposes” (para.  138), they insist that “[t]he trial judge should have 
considered the Kananaskis Falls Projects and other evidence available at trial as  
 relevant proxies for what [the] premium was worth” (para.  143). The majority’s 
reconsideration of evidence to reach its own conclusions is not a basis for overturning 
the fact -finder’s findings. While there may be a possibility of alternative find ings based 
on differing ascriptions of weight, the trial judge’s finding that the Kananaskis Project 
was not a relevant proxy was supported by the limited evidence before him. The trial 
judge therefore cannot be said to have made a palpable and overriding error in 
distinguishing the Kananaskis Project.  
(2) Impact on the Community and LSFN’s Perspective  
[185]  The majority further critiques the trial judge’s reasoning by noting that he 
ought to have given “appropriate weight to the evidence regarding the impact on the 
community  and . . . LSFN’s perspective ” (para.  140). These two points relate to 
profound losses not susceptible of mathematical calculation. I am of the view that the 
trial judge appropriately acknowledged and incorporated the impact on the community 
and L SFN’s perspective in his non -calculable loss analysis. I see no error here either.  
[186]  It is important to note that the trial judge’s valuation at $1.29 per acre is 
not the total valuation of the lands. It is simply the value of the lands as agricultural 
lands , based on the accepted expert evidence. The trial judge subsequently valued other 
calculable and non -calculable losses in order to arrive at his final conclusion. The 
$16.2  million he awarded as compensation for non -calculable losses was influenced by 
a number of factors:   
 1. The amount of the calculable losses;  
 
2. That many of the non -quantifiable losses created in 1929 persisted over 
decades, and some are still continuing ; 
 
3. The failure to remove the timber from the foreshore created an eyesore 
and impacted the  natural beauty of the Reserve land ; 
 
4. The failure to remove timber from the foreshore also created a very 
long-term water hazard effecting travel and fishing for members of the 
LSFN ; 
 
5. The flooding negatively affected hunting and trapping requiring 
members to travel further to engage in these pursuits and the number 
of animals were reduced for some period as a result of the flooding ; 
 
6. Although Canada supplied the materials to build the replacement 
houses, the LSFN members supplied their own labour ; 
 
7. The LSFN  docks and other outbuildings were not replaced ; 
 
8. LSFN hay land, gardens and rice fields were destroyed ; 
 
9. The hunting and trapping grounds on the Reserve were negatively 
impacted;  
 
10. Two LSFN communities were separated by water and one became an 
island, impa cting the ease of movement of the people who lived there ; 
 
11. Canada failed to keep the LSFN informed and never consulted with the 
band on any of the flood related matters that affected it, creating 
uncertainty and, doubtless, some anxiety for the band; and  
 
12. Canada failed to act in a prompt and effective manner to deal with 
compensation with the LSFN prior to the flooding and did not do so 
for many years after the flooding, despite being aware of the negative 
impact on the band members . [para.  512] 
It is the t otal equitable compensation, not simply the $1.29 per acre figure, which 
ensures that the appellants are  compensated for the value of the land s given the nature 
of their interest and the impact on LSFN.   
 [187]  When the compensation analysis is viewed in this way , it is clear that the 
trial judge’s inclusion of a robust non -calculable loss analysis allowed him to 
meaningfully consider the impact of the flooding on LSFN, such as the negative impact 
on hunting and trapping, hayland, gardens, and rice fields, includi ng off -reserve losses.  
C. Concluding Remarks  
[188]  As outlined above, I have found that the trial judge’s equitable 
compensation analysis does not contain any reviewable errors and that neither of the 
points raised by the majority provides any basis for interfering  with his judgment. 
Nonetheless, some concluding remarks are in order.  
[189]  While I agree with the majority that the appellants’ strategic decision to 
change their theory of compensation during this litigation is not a bar to addressing the 
merits of this appea l, a reconsideration of the merits must take place within the 
appropriate scope of appellate review and must take into account the evidence  — or 
lack thereof  — adduced at trial. In this case, the appellants’ position, and hence their 
strategy at trial, was  that compensation for their flooded lands ought to have included 
the value of a revenue -sharing agreement. The evidence introduced at trial was to this 
effect. The appellants were seemingly content with attacking Canada’s expert valuation 
of their lands a nd did not introduce any expert evidence regarding the fair market value 
of the lands or any premium that ought to have been paid in relation to the use of the 
lands for hydroelectric purposes.   
 [190]  Despite the appellants’ focus on their revenue -sharing claims and the fact 
that their “loss of use ” valuation  expert  was found not to be credible, the trial judge 
nevertheless undertook a thorough review of all of the evidence adduced by the parties, 
rejected Canada’s submission that the value of the lands should be $1.00 per acre, found 
that $1.29 per acre was the proper compensation for the flooded reserve lands, and 
subsequently awarded over $16  million in additional compensation for the non -
calculable losses suffered by LSFN.  
[191]  I find that the majority’s reasons see k to impose a greater obligation on a 
trial judge than the law demands. The trial judge had a daunting task. This trial lasted  
56 days, and all but 2 of the 24 witnesses called were expert witnesses. He had to 
resolve a myriad of difficult factual question s by examining  a voluminous factual 
record consisting of 8,3 47 documents entered as exhibits and thousands  of pages of 
expert reports. The majority r eturns  the award of equitable compensation for 
reassessment based on an alternative valuation methodology that is currently 
unsupported by the trial record. It is wrong to fault the trial judge for accepting the sole 
evidence proffered on the value of the flooded land s without pointing to any palpable 
and overriding error in his analysis. I could not say it be tter than Justice Wilson in 
Guerin : the trial judge “‘did the best he could’” .  
[192]  The a ppellants must bear the consequences of their tactical choice to 
advance a predominant  theory of the case based on revenue -sharing claim s. In 
retrospect , it may have been a more appr opriate trial strategy for the a ppellants to  
 present, alongside their revenue -sharing claim s, fulsome expert evidence on the value 
of the flooded reserve lands in the event that compensation was awarded  as a one -time 
payment , including a premium  based on the usefulness of the lands for hydroelectric 
purposes. The a ppellants are responsible for the ramifications of their trial strategy, 
even though they have changed tack on appeal.  
[193]  Returning the award of equitable compensation for reassessment, w hich 
will inevitably require additional discovery and historical and valuation expert 
evidence, would permit  the appellants to repair the deficiencies in their case and 
forward their new theory of the case de novo . Absent any reviewable error, and I have 
found none, this is not  the proper role of appellate intervention.  
IV. Conclusion  
[194]  The trial judge reviewed,  analyzed , and weighed the evidence before him. 
Based on the record, he was entitled to find that the argument that Canada could, and 
should, have paid m ore than fair market value for the reserve lands was “nothing more 
than optimistic speculation”.  As the trial judge did not commit any errors in principle, 
his compensation assessment “is entitled to considerable deference on appeal” 
(Whitefish , at para.  28). I would accord the trial judge this considerable deference and 
would not disturb his findings and conclusions. I would therefore dismiss the appeal  
with costs throughout.  
  
  Appeal allowed with costs throughout, CÔTÉ J. dissenting.  
 Solicitors  for the appellant s: Mandell Pinder, Vancouver.  
 Solicitor for the respondent : Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa.  
 Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of 
Saskatchewan : Attorney General of Saskatchewan, Regina.  
 Solicitors  for the intervener the Assembly of Manitoba  Chiefs : Fox Fraser, 
Calgary.  
 Solicitors  for the intervener the Tseshaht First Nation : DGW Law 
Corporation , Victoria.  
 Solicitors  for the intervener Manitob a Keewatinowi Okimakanak 
Inc.: Olthuis, Kleer, Townshend , Toronto.  
 Solicit ors for the intervener the Treaty Land Entitleme nt Committee of 
Manitoba Inc. : Duboff Edwards Haight & Schachter Law Corporation, Winnipeg.  
 Solicitors  for the intervener  the Anishinabek Nation : Westaway Law 
Group, Ottawa.   
  Solicitors  for the intervener the Wauzhushk Onigum Nation : David Garth 
Leitch Professional Corporation, Toronto.  
 Solicitors  for the intervener s the  Big Grassy First Nation,  the Onigaming 
First Nation, the Naotkamegwanning First Nation and  the Niisaachewan First 
Nation : Donald R. Colbo rne Barrister & Solicitor , Victoria.  
 Solicitors  for the intervener s the  Coalition of the Union of British 
Columbia Indian Chiefs,  the Penticton Indian Band and the Williams Lake First 
Nation : Mandell Pinder, Vancouver.  
 Solicitors  for the intervener the Federation of  Sovereign Indigenous 
Nations : Maurice Law, Calgary.  
 Solicitors  for the intervener the Atikameks heng Anishnawbek First 
Nation : Maurice Law, Calgary.  
 Solicitors  for the intervener  the Kwantle n First Nation : JFK Law 
Corporation, Vancouver.  
 Solicitor  for the intervener  the Assembly of First Nations : Assembly of 
First Nations, Ottawa.   
  Solicitors  for the intervener  the Assembly of First Nations 
Quebec -Labr ador : Cain Lamarre , Roberval , Que. 
 Solicitors  for the intervener  the Grand Council Treat y #3: First Peoples 
Law Corporation , Vancouver.  
 Solicitor  for the intervener the Mohawk Council of Kahnawà:ke : Mohawk 
Council of Kahnawà:ke  Legal Services , Mohawk Territory of Kahnawà:ke , Que . 
 Solicitors  for the intervener  the Elsipogtog First Nation : Semaganis 
Worme Lombard, Saskatoon.  
 Solicitors  for the intervener the Chemawawin Cree Nation : Arvay Finlay , 
Victoria.  
 Solicitors  for the intervener  the West Moberly First Nations : Camp 
Fiorante Matthews Mogerman, Vancouver.  