 Constitutional law — Aboriginal peoples — Aboriginal rights — Hunting 
— Citizen and resident of United States charged under provincial wildlife legislation 
with hunting in British Columbia without licence and while not being resident of 
province — Charges defended on basis of constitutionally -protected Aboriginal right 
to hunt in traditional territory of ancestors — Whether Aboriginal people located 
outside Ca nada can assert Aboriginal rights under Canadian Constitution — If so, 
whether provincial wildlife legislation of no force or effect by reason of Aboriginal 
right  — Constitutional Act, 1982, s.  35(1).  
 In October 2010, D, a citizen and resident of the Unit ed States of America, 
shot a cow -elk in British Columbia. He was charged with hunting w ithout a licence 
contrary to s.  11(1) of British Columbia’s Wildlife Act  and hunting big game while not 
being a resident of the province contrary to s.  47(a) of the Act. D defended the charges 
on the basis that he had an Aborigina l right to hunt protected by s.  35(1) of the  
 Constitution Act, 1982 , as he is a member of the Lakes Tribe of the Colville 
Confederated Tribes based in the State of Washington, a successor group o f the Sinixt 
people, and he shot the elk within the ancestral territory of the Sinixt in British 
Columbia.  
 At trial, it was accepted that the date of first contact between the Sinixt and 
Europeans was in 1811. At that time, the Sinixt were engaged in hunt ing, fishing, and 
gathering in their ancestral territory, which extended into what is now Washington State 
to the south, and into what is now British Columbia to the north. Until around 1870, 
the Sinixt continued their activities in the northern portion of  their territory, located in 
Canada. In the course of time, a constellation of factors made the Sinixt people move 
to the United States. The trial judge did not find that the move was voluntary. Until 
1930, members of the Lakes Tribe continued to hunt in B ritish Columbia, despite living 
in Washington State. After 1930, despite periods in which no hunting took place, the 
Lakes Tribe continued to have a connection to the land where their ancestors hunted in 
British Columbia.  
 The trial judge held that D was a member of the Lakes Tribe, and that the 
rights of the Sinixt continued with the Lakes Tribe. She applied the test for Aboriginal 
rights set out in R. v. Van der Peet , [1996] 2 S.C.R. 507, and held that D was exercising 
an Aboriginal right to hunt for foo d, social and cerem onial purposes guaranteed by 
s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 . D’s Aboriginal right remained in ex istence and 
was protected by s.  35(1), despite the Lakes Tribe’s departure from the Canadian part  
 of their traditional territory and notwithstanding a period of dormancy  in the exercise 
of the right. The trial judge held that the right was infringed by the Wildlife Act  and the 
infringement was not justified. D was acquitted. The Crown’s two subsequent appeals 
were dismissed. It now appe als to the Court, raising, as a constitutional question, 
whether the relevant provisions of the Wildlife Act  are of no force or effect with respect 
to D, by reason of an Aboriginal right within the meaning of s. 35(1) of the Constitution 
Act, 1982 . 
 Held  (Moldaver and Côté  JJ. dissenting) : The appeal should be dismissed 
and the constitutional question answered in the affirmative.  
 Per Wagner  C.J. and Abella, Karakatsanis, Brown, Rowe , Martin and 
Kasirer  JJ.: Persons who are not Canadian citizens and who do not reside in Canada 
can exercise an Aborigina l right that is protected by s.  35(1) of the Constitution Act, 
1982 . On a  purposive interpretation of s.  35(1), the expression “aboriginal peoples of 
Canada” means the modern -day successors of Aboriginal societ ies that occupied 
Canadian territory at the time of European contact, and this may include Aboriginal 
groups that are now outside Canada. As D is a member of the Lakes Tribe, which is a 
modern successor of the Sinixt, and as D’s claim satisfies the Van der  Peet test for an 
Aboriginal right  under s.  35(1) , ss. 11(1) and 47(a) of the Wildlife Act  are of no force 
or effect with respect to him.  
 In order to assert rights protected  under s.  35(1) of the Constitution Act, 
1982 , an Aboriginal group must be part of the “aboriginal peoples of Canada”.  This is  
 a threshold question,  in the sense that if a group is not an Aboriginal people of Canada, 
there is no need to proceed to the test for Aboriginal rights set out in Van der Peet . 
Section 35(1) must be interprete d in a purposive way. A review of the jurisprudence 
shows that s.  35(1) serves to recognize the prior occupation of Canada by Aboriginal 
societies and to reconcile their contemporary existence with Crown sovereignty. These 
purposes are expressed in the doc trinal structure of Aboriginal law, which gives effect 
to rights and relationships that arise from the prior occupation of Canada by Aboriginal 
societies. Because the doctrine of Aboriginal rights arises from the simple fact of prior 
occupation, the Aborig inal peoples of Canada under s.  35(1) are the modern successors 
of those Aboriginal societies that occupied Canadian territory at the time of European 
contact, even if they are now outside Canada.  
 An interpretation of the expression “aboriginal peoples o f Canada” in 
s. 35(1) that includes Aboriginal peoples who were here when the Europeans arrived 
and later moved or were forced to move elsewhere, or on whom international 
boundaries were imposed, reflects the purpose of reconciliation. By contrast, an 
interpretation that excludes Aboriginal peoples who were forced to move out of Canada 
would risk perpetuating the historical injustice suffered by Aboriginal peoples at the 
hands of Europeans. As well, it bears emphasis that s.  35(1) did not create Aboriginal 
rights. T he practices, customs and traditions that underlie these rights existed before 
1982. An interpretation of s.  35(1) that limits its scope to those Aboriginal peoples who 
were located in Canada in 1982 would fail to give effect to this point by trea ting s.  35(1) 
as the source of Aboriginal rights.   
  If the threshold question is met, the analysis then proceeds under Van der 
Peet. The Van der Peet test is the same for groups outside Canada as for groups within 
Canada. That Aboriginal rights must be grou nded in the existence of a historic and 
present -day community, and that modern -day claimants must establish a connection 
with the pre -sovereignty group upon whose practices they rely, is so for Aboriginal 
groups inside or outside Canada. There is no additi onal requirement, for groups outside 
Canada, of recognition by a related Aboriginal collective residing in Canada. This 
requirement would place a higher burden on Aboriginal communities who seek to claim 
rights if the group moved, was forced to move, or wa s divided by the creation of an 
international border. It would risk defining Aboriginal rights in a manner that excludes 
some of those the provision was intended to protect. Moreover, it would raise myriad 
practical difficulties, such as which group within  Canada has a say in the recognition 
of a claimant located outside Canada, where there are competing groups, which body 
can represent a collective residing in Canada, and what happens if there is no related 
modern collective residing in Canada.  
 Under the  Van der Peet  analysis, courts must characterize the right claimed 
in light of the pleadings and evidence; determine whether the claimant has proven that 
a relevant pre -contact practice, tradition or custom existed and was integral to the 
distinctive cultu re of the pre -contact society; and determine whether the claimed 
modern right is demonstrably connected to, and reasonably regarded as a continuation 
of, the pre -contact practice. Continuity plays a role both at the second and the third 
stages of the Van d er Peet  analysis. At the second stage, showing that a practice is  
 integral to the claimant’s culture today, and that it has continuity with pre -contact times, 
can count as proof that the practice was integral to the claimant’s culture pre -contact. 
At the third stage, the question is whether the modern practice which is claimed to be 
an exercise of an Aboriginal right is connected to, and reasonably seen as a continuation 
of, the pre -contact practice. Continuity with the pre -contact practice is required in order 
for the claimed activity to fall within the scope of the right. However, an unbroken 
chain of continuity is not required; it is not unusual for the exercise of a right to lapse 
for a period of time. The assessment of continuity, both at the second an d third stages, 
is a highly fact -specific exercise. The weighing of evidence in Aboriginal claims is 
generally the domain of the trial judge, who is best situated to assess the evidence, and 
is consequently accorded significant latitude in this regard.  
 In the present case, the threshold question is met. The trial judge found as 
a fact that the Sinixt occupied territory in what is now British Columbia at the time of 
European contact, and that the Lakes Tribe are a modern successor of the Sinixt. The 
migrati on of the Lakes Tribe from British Columbia to a different part of their 
traditional territory in Washington State did not cause the group to lose its identity or 
its status as a successor to the Sinixt. Accordingly, the Lakes Tribe is an Aboriginal 
people  of Canada. Then, with respect to the Van der Peet  test, the trial judge found, 
based on the evidence, that hunting for food, social and ceremonial purposes within the 
traditional territory of the Sinixt in British Columbia at the time of contact was integ ral 
to the distinctive culture of the Sinixt. The trial judge also found that the modern -day 
practice of hunting in this territory, as D did, is a continuation of this pre -contact  
 practice. Setting aside the periods in which no hunting took place, there wa s no 
significant dissimilarity between the pre -contact practice and the modern one. As a 
result, D was exercising an Aboriginal right protected by s.  35(1).  
 Per Côté  J. (dissenting): The appeal should be allowed and the 
constitutional question answered i n the negative. The constitutional protection of 
Aboriginal rights contained in s.  35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 , does not extend 
to an Aboriginal group located outside of Canada. And even if it did, D cannot establish 
that he was exercising an Abori ginal right to hunt in the Sinixt traditional territory in 
British Columbia, as the modern group’s claim lacks continuity with the pre -contact 
group’s practices. Accordingly, D’s claim must fail and he should not be exempt from 
the Wildlife Act  provisions under which he was charged. A verdict of guilty should be 
entered on both counts of hunting without a licence and hunting big game while not 
being a resident, and the matter should be remitted to the trial court for sentencing.  
 To be e ntitled to the prote ction of s.  35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 , 
the modern -day successors of Aboriginal societies that occupied Canadian territory at 
the time of European contact cannot be located anywhere other than Canada. The 
majority’s conclusion that the constitutio nal protec tion of Aboriginal rights in s.  35(1) 
extends to an Aboriginal group located outside of Canada is contrary to a purposive 
analysis of s.  35(1), having regard to its relevant linguistic, philosophic, and historical 
contexts. The framers’ intent wa s to protect the rights of Aboriginal groups that are 
members of, and participants in, Canadian society.   
  First, a textual analysis of s. 35(1) reveals the significance of the drafters’ 
choice to include the phrase “of Canada” rather than leaving the term “aboriginal 
peoples” without any qualifier. On the basis of the presumption against tautology, the 
words “of Canada” cannot be superfluous. In addition, similar limiting language is used 
repeatedly in the Constitution Act, 1982 , as a geographical qualifier . Interpreting 
“aboriginal peoples of Canada” in a more expansive fashion would be incongruent with 
the presumption of consistent expression and contrary to the intention of the drafters. 
Second, the philosophic context helps explain why residence or citiz enship is not 
referenced in s.  35(1), but is assumed.  By framing s.  35(1) as a provision granting 
special constitutional protection to one part of Canadian society, the Court has 
consistently understood it to import a residency or citizenship requirement. Section 
35(1)’s purpose should be understood in relation to the interests it was meant to protect, 
that is, Aboriginal peoples as full participants with non -Aboriginal peoples in a shared 
Canadian sovereignty. The protections, therefore, do not and cannot apply to 
Aboriginal groups in other countries; it cannot be said that they fully participate with 
other Canadians in their collective governance, nor do they  contribute to Canada’s 
national diversity. Third, the historical record does not show that expanding the 
protections of s.  35(1) to non -Canadian Aboriginal groups was ever considered. The 
limited historical sources that provide guidance as to the meaning of the expression 
“aboriginal peoples of Canada” show an intention to limit the constitutional protection 
of Aboriginal rights to only those groups located within Canada.   
  The conclusion that the enactment of s.  35(1) did not constitutionalize 
Aboriginal rights held by collectives located outside of Canada is further bolstered by 
the deleterious consequences that would arise from the opposite conclusion. First, 
s. 35.1 of the Constitution Act, 1982 , uses the phrase “aboriginal peoples of Canada” 
in setting  out an obligation to invite representatives of these groups to constitutional 
conferences. It would be contrary to the organizing constitutional principle of 
democracy and inconsistent with the purpose of patriation to allow Aboriginal groups 
located outs ide of Canada to participate in Canad ian democracy as required by s.  35.1. 
Second, a multitude of challenges would arise with respect to the Crown’s duty to 
consult. The numbers of groups to consult and, where appropriate, accommodate, 
would dramatically i ncrease, and it can be anticipated that in some cases 
accommodating the interests of s.  35(1) rights holders outside of Canada would run 
counter to ac commodating the interests of s.  35(1) rights holders within Canada. Third, 
finding that Aboriginal groups outside of Canada are “aboriginal peoples of Canada” 
raises the possibility that these groups may, in principle, hold constitutionally protected 
Aboriginal title to Canadian lands. It would be a remarkable proposition that a foreign 
group could hold consti tutionally protected title to Canadian territory. The drafters of 
s. 35(1) could not have intended these deleterious consequences to arise.  
 In the present case, the Lakes Tribe is wholly located in the United States. 
As D is not a member of a collective that is part of the “aboriginal peoples of Canada”, 
he cannot exercise a constitutionally -protected Aboriginal right to hunt in British 
Columbia.  And even if there were agreement with the majority’s conclusion that the  
 phrase “aboriginal peoples of Canada”  includes groups located outside of Canada, there 
is disagreement with its application of the Van der Peet test to D’s claim. This test 
protects only those present -day practices that have a reasonable degree of continuity 
with practices that existed prior to contact. While the test does not require an unbroken 
chain of continuity, and while continuity must be interpreted flexibly, such flexibility 
has its limits. While temporal gaps do not necessarily preclude the establishment of an 
Aboriginal right, faili ng to tender sufficient evidence that, at least, a connection to the 
historical practice was maintained during such gaps may be fat al. There is no direct 
evidence that the Lakes Tribe engaged in anything that could be considered a 
modern -day practice of hu nting in British Columbia after 1930. There was no basis 
upon which the trial judge could have drawn an inference of continuity; and  given the 
Lakes Tribe’s lengthy and unaccounted -for absence from British  Columbia between 
1930 and 2010, continuity is not made out.  As there was nothing in existence in 1982 
to which s.  35(1) protection could attach, D’s claim must fail.   
 Per Moldaver  J. (dissenting): Even assuming that the majority is correct 
in holding that, as a member of an Aboriginal collective located outside Canada, D is 
entitled to claim the constitut ional protection provided by s.  35(1) of the Constitution 
Act, 1982 , there is agreement with Côté  J. that in this case, D has not met the onus of 
establishing the continuity element of his claim, under th e test for Aboriginal rights 
pursuant to Van der Peet . The appeal should therefore be allowed on that basis  and the 
remedy set out by Côté  J. should be imposed.   

The judgment of Wagner C.J.  and Abella , Karakatsanis, Brown, Rowe, Martin and 
Kasirer  JJ. was delivered by  
 
 ROWE J. —  
[1] Richard Lee Desautel entered Canada legally from the United States of 
America. He shot an elk contra ry to provincial wildlife rules and advised provincial 
authorities that he had done so. As he expected, he was charged for this. He defended 
the charges on the basis that he had an Aboriginal right to hunt the elk, one which is 
protected by s.  35(1) of the  Constitution Act, 1982 . Thus, this is a test case, the central 
issue being whether persons who are not Canadian citizens and who do not reside in 
Canada can exercise an Aboriginal right that is protected by s.  35(1). For the reasons 
that follow, I would say yes. On a purposive interpretation of s.  35(1), the scope of 
“aboriginal peoples of Canada” is clear: it must mean the modern -day successors of 
Aboriginal societies that occupied Canadian territory at the time of European contact.   
 [2] Beyond agreeing with Mr. Desautel on this central issue, I will say little 
more about what that means for the exercise of rights protected under s.  35(1). That 
follows for two reasons. First, questions of law are better resolved in cases where there 
is a dispute that requires the answering of those questions. And, second, the defence of 
a prosecution for a provincial regulatory offence, while it may serve as a test case (as 
here), is not well -suited to deal with such broader issues. Such issues are better dealt 
with in an actio n setting out the right claimed, with a full evidentiary record, and 
seeking declaratory relief. I will return to such matters toward the end of my reasons.  
I. Background  
[3] On October 14, 2010, Mr. Desautel shot one cow -elk near Castlegar, 
British Columbia. He was charged with hunting without a licence contrary to s. 11(1) 
of the Wildlife Act , R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 488, and hunting big game while not being a 
resident contrary to s. 47(a) of the Act. He did not have a licence and was not a resident 
of British Columbi a. Mr. Desautel is a citizen of the United States, and a resident of 
Ichelium in the State of Washington. Mr. Desautel admitted the actus reus of the 
offences, but raised a defence that he was exercising his Aboriginal right to hunt in the 
traditional terr itory of his Sinixt ancestors, a right protected under s.  35(1).  
[4] Mr. Desautel is a member of the Lakes Tribe of the Colville Confederated 
Tribes based in the State of Washington in the United States, a successor group of the 
Sinixt people. At trial, the y ear 1811 was accepted as the date of first contact between 
the Sinixt and Europeans. At this time, the Sinixt were engaged in a seasonal round of  
 hunting, fishing, and gathering, travelling largely by canoe in their ancestral territory. 
This territory ran as far south as an island just above Kettle Falls, in what is now 
Washington State, and as far north as the Big Bend of the Columbia River, north of 
Revelstoke in what is now British Columbia. The place where Mr. Desautel shot the 
elk in October 2010 was w ithin the ancestral territory of the Sinixt.  
[5] Over the course of the latter half of the 19th century, the Sinixt gradually 
moved to occupy the southern portion of their territory full -time, the portion that lies 
in the United States. Until around the year 1870, the Sinixt continued their seasonal 
round in the northern portion of their territory, located in Canada. In the course of time, 
a “constellation of factors” made the Sinixt people move to the United States (2017 
BCPC 84, [2018] 1 C.N.L.R. 97, at para . 110). By 1872, a number of members of the 
Sinixt were living for the most part in Washington State. The trial judge did not find 
that the Sinixt were forced out of Canada “at gunpoint” (para.  101), but nor did she find 
that the move was voluntary, as the  Lakes Tribe never gave up their claim to their 
traditional territory in Canada. Until the year 1930, the evidence clearly showed that 
members of the Lakes Tribe continued to hunt in British Columbia, despite living on 
the Colville Reserve in Washington St ate and in the face of the creation of an 
international border by the 1846 Oregon Boundary Treaty and the outlawing of their 
hunting by British Columbia through the Game Protection Amendment Act, 1896 , 
S.B.C., c.  22. From 1930 until 1972, there may have be en a period of dormancy.  As 
was found at trial, the Lakes Tribe continues to have a connection to the land where 
their ancestors hunted in British Columbia.   
 [6] Meanwhile, the population of Sinixt who had remained in Canada was 
small. By 1902, only 21 Sinixt still lived on their traditional territory in Canada, in the 
Arrow Lakes Band reserve. By 1930, only one person remained on the rolls of the 
Arrow Lakes Band, and after her death in 1956, the government of Canada declared 
the Arrow Lakes Band extinct, and the reserve lands reverted to the provincial Crown.  
II. Judicial History  
A. British Columbia Provincial Court, 2017 BCPC 84, [2018] 1 C.N.L.R. 97 
(Mrozinski J.)  
[7] The trial judge held that there was no doubt that Mr. Desautel is a member 
of the Lakes Tribe, and saw the Lakes Tribe as a clear successor group to the Sinixt, 
such that the communal rights of the Sinixt could continue with the Lakes Tribe.  The 
trial judge applied the test this Court set out in R. v. Van der Peet , [1996] 2 S.C.R. 507. 
She held that Mr.  Desautel was exercising an Aboriginal right to hunt for food, social 
and ceremonial purposes guaranteed by s.  35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 .  
[8] Despite the Lakes Tribe’s departure from the northern part of their 
traditional territory, its members rema ined connected to that geographical area. The 
evidence demonstrated that the land and the traditions were not forgotten, and that the 
connection to the land was still present in the minds of the members of the Lakes Tribe.  
The trial judge found that the re quirement of continuity was met, notwithstanding a  
 period of dormancy between 1930 and 1972, because there is no requirement of “an 
unbroken chain of continuity” ( Van der Peet , at para.  65). 
[9] Moreover, the trial judge decided it was not necessary to define the 
Aboriginal right as including a mobility  right, so no issue of sovereign incompatibility 
arose. Mr. Desautel’s Aboriginal right remained in existence and was protected by 
s. 35(1). The trial judge held that the right was infringed by the provisions of the 
Wildlife Act  and the infringement was not justified. Mr. Desautel was acquitted.  
B. British Columbia Superior Court, 2017 BCSC 2389, [2018] 1 C.N.L.R. 135 
(Sewell J.)  
[10] The appeal was dismissed. The summary conviction appeal judge held that 
the Sinixt peop le are the relevant collective and that modern -day Lakes Tribe members 
are entitled to assert the Aboriginal rights held by the Sinixt, based on practices that 
were part of their distinctive culture at the time of contact, in their traditional territory 
in British Columbia. According to the summary conviction appeal judge, the words 
“aboriginal peoples of Canada” in s.  35(1) must be interpreted in a purposive way, and 
mean Aboriginal peoples who, prior to contact, occupied what became Canada. 
Therefore, mod ern-day members of the Sinixt are not precluded from asserting rights 
under s. 35(1) merely because they now live in the United States. This interpretation of 
s. 35(1) is consistent with the objective of reconciliation. To establish an Aboriginal 
right to hunt, Mr. Desautel had to meet the requirements of the Van der Peet test. The  
 summary conviction appeal judge found that the trial judge made no error in applying 
the Van der Peet  test. 
[11] The summary conviction appeal judge held that Mr.  Desautel’s Aborigina l 
right to hunt is not incompatible with Canadian sovereignty. The fact that the 
government of Canada has the right to control its borders is not fatal to the assertion of 
an Aboriginal right to hunt in Canada by an Aboriginal group located in the United 
States. Mr.  Desautel was not charged with coming into Canada unlawfully and there 
was no evidence that he was denied entry. In contrast with the claimant in Mitchell v. 
M.N.R. , 2001 SCC 33, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 911,  Mr. Desautel was not asserting an 
Aboriginal r ight to cross the border.  
C. British Columbia Court of Appeal, 2019 BCCA 151, 24 B.C.L.R. (6th) 48 (Smith, 
Willcock and Fitch JJ.A.)  
[12] The Crown’s appeal was dismissed. Under a purposive approach, the Court 
of Appeal concluded that an Aboriginal group that doe s not reside in Canada and whose 
members are neither residents nor citizens of Canada can claim constitutional rights 
under s.  35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 . It is not a requirement that there be a 
present -day Aboriginal community in the geographic a rea where the claimed right is 
exercised. In this case, the Court of Appeal found that the relevant historic collective 
is the Sinixt and that the Lakes Tribe is a modern collective descended from the Sinixt. 
The finding of the trial judge that the chain o f continuity had not been broken was 
entitled to deference. There is no requirement under the Van der Peet test, according to  
 the Court of Appeal, that the claimant must be a member of a contemporary Aboriginal 
community currently located in the geographic  area where the right was historically 
exercised. Imposing such a requirement would fail to take into account the Aboriginal 
perspective, the realities of colonization and displacement, and the goal of 
reconciliation. The Court of Appeal concluded that the  rights of Mr.  Desautel’s 
community to hunt on their ancestral lands in British Columbia were never voluntarily 
surrendered, abandoned or extinguished. Therefore, Mr. Desautel has an Aboriginal 
right to hunt in British Columbia.  
[13] It was further held that pr actical concerns about the expansion of Canada’s 
duty to consult to Aboriginal groups in the United States could not prevent a court from 
recognizing their inherent rights. Finally, the Court of Appeal determined that it was 
not necessary to consider Mr.  Desautel’s incidental mobility right to cross the border 
and the compatibility of such a right with Canadian sovereignty, because this issue was 
not addressed at trial and its resolution was not necessary for the determination of the 
appeal.  
III. Issue  
[14] The appe llant Her Majesty the Queen in Right of British Columbia 
(hereinafter “the Crown”) raises the following constitutional question:  
Are ss. 11(1) and 47(a) of the Wildlife Act , R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 488, as they 
read in October 2010, of no force or effect with re spect to the respondent, 
being a member of the Lakes Tribe of the Confederated Tribes of the  
 Colville Reservation in Washington State, U.S.A., in virtue of s. 52 of the 
Constitution Act, 1982 , by reason of an Aboriginal right within the 
meaning of s. 35 of  the Constitution Act, 1982 , invoked by the respondent?  
 
(A.R., vol. I, at p.  139) 
[15] To answer this question, the Court must determine whether an Aboriginal 
people located outside Canada can assert rights protected under s.  35(1) of the 
Constitution Act, 198 2. 
IV. Submissions of the Parties  
A. Appellant: Her Majesty the Queen in Right of British Columbia  
[16] The Crown’s main submission is that Mr. Desautel cannot assert 
Aboriginal rights under s.  35(1) because the scope of this provision is limited to 
Aboriginal peoples  located in Canada. At best, Mr. Desautel can claim a common law 
right to hunt, which would not constitute a defence to the regulatory charges against 
him. In the Crown’s submission, the Van der Peet test for the recognition of rights 
under s.  35(1) requir es the presence of a present -day collective in the area where the 
right was exercised historically. In the present case, the relevant modern collective 
would be the Lakes Tribe, a group located in the State of Washington, not in British 
Columbia. Moreover,  because Mr. Desautel is a resident of the United States, the 
exercise of the right to hunt in British Columbia necessarily involves an incidental 
mobility right to cross the border, which is incompatible with Canadian sovereignty,  
 and the result is that t he s. 35(1) Aboriginal right claimed by Mr. Desautel never came 
into existence.  
B. Respondent: Mr. Desautel  
[17] Mr. Desautel argues that he has an Aboriginal right to hunt in the ancestral 
territory of the Sinixt, the relevant modern -day collective, in British Co lumbia. This 
right is protected under s.  35(1). To assert s.  35(1) rights, he argues, the only test that 
an Aboriginal people has to pass is the Van der Peet  test. Therefore, there is no 
threshold issue distinct from the test elaborated by this Court for t he recognition of 
Aboriginal rights. Moreover, the Van der Peet test has never required an additional 
requirement of geographic continuity. The fact that an Aboriginal people is solely based 
outside Canada has no impact on the recognition of the right as l ong as the requirements 
of the Van der Peet  test are met. Finally, Mr. Desautel submits that there is no mobility 
right at issue in this case.  
V. Analysis  
A. The Scope of Section 35(1)  
(1) The Threshold Question  
[18] Section  35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 , says:   
 The existing aboriginal and treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples of 
Canada are hereby recognized and affirmed.  
 
Les droits existants — ancestraux ou issus de traités — des peuples 
autochtones du Canada sont reconnus et confirmés.  
It is clear from the text of s.  35(1) that, to fall within its scope, an Aboriginal group 
must be an “aboriginal peopl[e] of Canada”. The question raised by this appeal is 
whether a group whose members are neither Canadian citizens nor Canadian residents 
can meet this condition. The text of s.  35(1) does not provide a clear answer to this 
question. The words “of Canada” are capable of different meanings, as “of” can be used 
to express a range of different relationships.  
[19] Whether a group is an Aboriginal peop le of Canada is, analytically 
speaking, a different question from whether the group has an Aboriginal right. This 
Court’s decision in Van der Peet  was about the latter question. It set out a test for having 
an Aboriginal right, not for being an Aboriginal people of Canada. The Van der Peet 
test by itself is not, therefore, dispositive of this appeal. That said, evidence that is 
relevant to the question whether a group has an Aboriginal right may also be relevant 
to the question whether the group is an Abori ginal people of Canada.  
[20] Whether a group is an Aboriginal people of Canada is a threshold question, 
in the sense that if a group is not an Aboriginal people of Canada, there is no need to 
proceed to the Van der Peet  test. But this threshold question does no t arise in every 
case. In most cases there is no doubt that the claimant belongs to an Aboriginal people 
of Canada, so there is no need to address the threshold question. The threshold question  
 is likely to arise only where there is some ground for doubt, such as where the group is 
located outside of Canada. It should not be construed as an additional burden on rights 
claimants that has to be satisfied in every case.  
[21] No previous decision of this Court interprets the scope of the words 
“aboriginal peoples of  Canada” in s.  35(1). That is our task here. As this Court has often 
recognized, s.  35(1) must be interpreted in a purposive way ( R. v. Sparrow , [1990] 1 
S.C.R. 1075,  at p. 1106; Van der Peet , at paras.  21-22; Manitoba Metis Federation Inc. 
v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2013 SCC 14, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 623, at para.  76). 
[22] For the reasons that follow, I am of the view that a consistent development 
of this Court’s s.  35(1) jurisprudence requires that groups located outside Canada can 
be Aboriginal peoples of Canada. As I will explain, the two purposes of s.  35(1) are to 
recognize the prior occupation of Canada by organized, autonomous societies and to 
reconcile their modern -day existence with the Crown’s assertion of sovereignty over 
them. These purposes are r eflected in the structure of Aboriginal rights and title 
doctrine, which first looks back to the practices of groups that occupied Canadian 
territory prior to European contact, sovereignty or effective control, and then expresses 
those practices as constit utional rights held by modern -day successor groups within the 
Canadian legal order. The same purposes are reflected in the principle of the honour of 
the Crown, under which the Crown’s historic assertion of sovereignty over Aboriginal 
societies gives rise to continuing obligations to their successors as part of an ongoing 
process of reconciliation.   
 [23] On this interpretation, the scope of “aboriginal peoples of Canada” is clear: 
it must mean the modern -day successors of Aboriginal societies that occupied Canad ian 
territory at the time of European contact. As a result, groups whose members are neither 
citizens nor residents of Canada can be Aboriginal peoples of Canada.  
(2) A Purposive Interpretation of Section 35(1)  
[24] The prior occupation of Canadian territory by or ganized Aboriginal 
societies was recognized before s.  35(1) was enacted. In Calder v. Attorney -General of 
British Columbia , [1973] S.C.R. 313, the claimants sought a declaration of Aboriginal 
title in their traditional territory. While the claim was unsucc essful, Judson J. 
characterized the source of Aboriginal title in comments that have been repeatedly cited 
by this Court: “ the fact is that when the settlers came, the Indians were there, organized 
in societies and occupying the land  as their forefathers h ad done for centuries. This is 
what Indian title means” ( Calder , at p.  328 (emphasis added); see also Roberts v. 
Canada , [1989] 1 S.C.R. 322, at p.  340; Guerin  v. The Queen , [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335, at 
pp. 377-78). This point was taken up in Sparrow , where thi s Court laid out the analysis 
for justified infringements of Aboriginal rights. In finding that the Musqueam had an 
Aboriginal right protected by s.  35(1), Dickson C.J. and La Forest J. observed that they 
“have lived in the area as an organized society lon g before  the coming of European 
settlers” ( Sparrow , at p.  1094 (emphasis added)).  
[25] In R. v. Badger , [1996] 1 S.C.R. 771, this Court confirmed that the Sparrow  
test applies to infringements of treaty rights. In arriving at this conclusion, Cory J. drew  
 on a  second theme from the pre -1982 jurisprudence. The Crown’s assertion of 
sovereignty over Aboriginal societies, he held, gave rise to a distinctive legal 
relationship. “[B]oth aboriginal and treaty rights possess in common a unique, sui 
generis  nature. In e ach case, the honour of the Crown is engaged through its 
relationship with the native people ” (Badger , at para.  78 (emphasis added; citations 
omitted)). In the treaty context, this principle can be traced back to the dissenting 
reasons of Gwynne J. in Prov ince of Ontario v. Dominion of Canada and Province of 
Quebec (1895), 25 S.C.R. 434, at pp.  511-12; and in Ontario Mining Co. v. Seybold  
(1901), 32 S.C.R. 1, at p.  2. 
[26] These two themes were brought out explicitly in Van der Peet , where 
Lamer C.J. set out the test for Aboriginal rights. Lamer C.J. first observed, at para.  30, 
that “when Europeans arrived in North America, aboriginal peoples were already here , 
living in communities on the land, and participating in distinctive cult ures, as they had 
done for centuries” (emphasis in original). Second, he wrote at para.  31, s.  35(1) is “ the 
constitutional framework through which the fact that aboriginals lived on the land in 
distinctive societies, with their own practices, traditions a nd cultures, is acknowledged 
and reconciled with the sovereignty of the Crown”. In short,  
the aboriginal rights recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1) are best 
understood as, first, the means by which the Constitution recognizes the 
fact that prior to the ar rival of Europeans in North America the land was 
already occupied by distinctive aboriginal societies, and as, second, the 
means by which that prior occupation is reconciled with the assertion of 
Crown sovereignty over Canadian territory. [para.  43]  
 [27] The tw o purposes of s.  35(1) underlie the test for Aboriginal rights set out 
in Van der Peet . The court first looks back to the historic practices of Aboriginal 
societies in Canada prior to contact, and second, recognizes those practices as 
Aboriginal rights hel d by their modern -day successors within the Canadian legal order: 
R. v. Gladstone , [1996] 2 S .C.R. 723, at para.  73; Mitchell , at para.  12. In R. v. Sappier , 
2006 SCC 54, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 686, at para.  45, Bastarache J. explained that the doctrine 
of Aboriginal rights “ arises from the simple fact of prior occupation of the lands now 
forming Canada”. He added that “[t]he ‘distinctive aboriginal culture’ must be taken to 
refer to the reality that, despite British sovereignty, aboriginal people were the o riginal 
organized society occupying and using Canadian lands ” (para.  45, quoting the 
dissenting reasons of  L’Heureux -Dubé J. in Van der Peet , at para.  159 (emphasis 
added)).  
[28] The test for Aboriginal title, a variation of the Van der Peet test, reflects 
the same two purposes. In Delgamuukw v. British Columbia , [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010, this 
Court explained that Aboriginal title has two sources: first, Aboriginal possession of 
the land before the assertion of Crown sovereignty, and second, “the relationship 
betwee n common law and pre -existing systems of aboriginal law”  (para.  114). As 
LeBel J., concurring in  R. v. Marshall , 2005 SCC 43, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 220, at para.  129, 
explained:   
As with all aboriginal rights protected by s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 
1982 , aboriginal title arises from the prior possession of land and the prior 
social organization and distinctive cultures of aboriginal peoples on that 
land. It originates from “the prior occupation of Canada by aboriginal  
 peoples” and from “the relationship be tween common law and pre -existing 
systems of aboriginal law”. [Citations omitted. ] 
The test for title looks back to the historic occupation of Canadian territory by 
Aboriginal societies at the date of Crown sovereignty and recognizes this occupation 
as Abo riginal title, “a burden on the Crown’s underlying title” ( Delgamuukw , at 
para.  145), within the Canadian legal order.  
[29] The two purposes of s.  35(1) were reiterated in Mitchell  by McLachlin C.J., 
who said:  
Long before Europeans explored and settled North A merica, aboriginal 
peoples were occupying and using most of this vast expanse of land in 
organized, distinctive societies with their own social and political 
structures.  . . . [T]he Crown asserted that sovereignty over the land, and 
ownership of its underl ying title, vested in the Crown. With this assertion 
arose an obligation to treat aboriginal peoples fairly and honourably, and 
to protect them from exploitation, a duty characterized 
as “fiduciary”  in Guerin . [Emphasis added; citations omitted; para  9.] 
[30] In this Court’s recent jurisprudence, the special relationship between 
Aboriginal peoples and the Crown has been articulated in terms of the honour of the 
Crown. As was explained by McLachlin C.J. and Karakatsanis J. in Manitoba Metis , at 
para.  67: 
The hono ur of the Crown [.  . .] recognizes the impact of the 
“superimposition of European laws and customs” on pre -existing 
Aboriginal societies . Aboriginal peoples were here first , and they were 
never conquered; yet, they became subject to a legal system that the y did 
not share. Historical treaties were framed in that unfamiliar legal system,  
 and negotiated and drafted in a foreign language. The honour of the Crown 
characterizes the “special relationship” that arises out of this colonial 
practice.  [Emphasis added;  citations omitted.]  
While the honour of the Crown looks back to this historic impact, it also looks forward 
to reconciliation between the Crown and Aboriginal peoples in an ongoing, “mutually 
respectful long -term relationship” ( Beckman v. Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation , 
2010 SCC 53, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 103, at para.  10; s ee also Mikisew Cree First 
Nation  v. Canada (Governor General in Council) , 2018 SCC  40, [2018] 2 S.C.R. 765, 
at para.  21, per Karakatsanis J.; and Newfoundland and Labrador (Atto rney 
General)  v. Uashaunnuat (Innu of Uashat and of Mani -Utenam) , 2020 SCC 4, at 
paras.  21 and 28, per Wagner C.J. and Abella and Karakatsanis JJ.; and at paras.  207-8, 
per Brown and Rowe JJ., dissenting) . The honour of the Crown requires that Aboriginal 
rights be determined and respected, and may require the Crown to consult and 
accommodate while the negotiation process continues ( Haida Nation  v. British 
Columbia (Minister of Forests) , 2004 SCC 73, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 511, at para.  25; see 
also Taku River Tlin git First Nation v. British Columbia (Project Assessment Director) , 
2004 SCC 74, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 550, at para.  24). It also requires that the Crown act 
diligently to fulfill its constitutional obligations to Aboriginal peoples ( Manitoba Metis , 
at para.  75).  
[31] As this review of the jurisprudence shows, s.  35(1) serves to recognize the 
prior occupation of Canada by Aboriginal societies and to reconcile their contemporary 
existence with Crown sovereignty. These purposes are expressed in the doctrinal  
 structure of Aboriginal law, which gives effect to rights and relationships that arise 
from the prior occupation of Canada by Aboriginal societies. Implicit in this doctrinal 
structure, and the purposes that underlie it, is the answer to our question. The 
Aboriginal  peoples of Canada under s.  35(1) are the modern successors of those 
Aboriginal societies that occupied Canadian territory at the time of European contact. 
This may include Aboriginal groups that are now outside Canada.  
[32] I hasten to add that this criterion will need to be modified in the case of the 
Métis. Because Métis communities arose after contact between other Aboriginal 
peoples and Europeans, “ the manner in which the aboriginal rights of other aboriginal 
peoples are defined is not necessarily determina tive of the manner in which the 
aboriginal rights of the Métis are defined” ( Van der Peet , at para.  67). Given that the 
present case is not about Métis s.  35(1) rights, I leave for another day precisely what 
criterion should be applied to determine whether  a Métis community is an “aboriginal 
peopl[e ] of Canada”, in cases where there is doubt.  
[33] I would add that a n interpretation of “aboriginal peoples of Canada” in 
s. 35(1) that includes Aboriginal peoples who were here when the Europeans arrived 
and later mo ved or were forced to move elsewhere, or on whom international 
boundaries were imposed, reflects the purpose of reconciliation. The displacement of 
Aboriginal peoples as a result of colonization is well acknowledged:  
Aboriginal peoples were displaced physi cally — they were denied access 
to their traditional territories and in many cases actually forced to move to 
new locations selected for them by colonial authorities. They were also  
 displaced socially and culturally, subject to intensive missionary activit y 
and the establishment of schools — which undermined their ability to pass 
on traditional values to their children, imposed male -oriented Victorian 
values, and attacked traditional activities such as significant dances and 
other ceremonies. In North Ameri ca they were also displaced politically, 
forced by colonial laws to abandon or at least disguise traditional 
governing structures and processes in favour of colonial -style municipal 
institutions.  
 
(Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples , vol.  1, Looking 
Forward, Looking Back  (1996), at pp. 139 -40) 
By contrast, an interpretation that excludes Aboriginal peoples who were forced to 
move out of Canada would risk “perpetuating the historical injustice suffered by 
aboriginal peoples at the han ds of colonizers” ( R. v. Côté , [1996] 3 S.C.R. 139, at 
para.  53). 
[34] Moreover, it bears emphasis that s. 35(1) did not create Aboriginal rights. 
As Calder  and indeed the Royal Proclamation, 1763  (G.B.), 3 Geo. 3 (reproduced in 
R.S.C. 1985, App.  II, No.  1), sh ow, Aboriginal rights long predated 1982 (see 
M. D. Walters, “ The ‘Golden Thread’ of Continuity: Aboriginal Customs at Common 
Law and Under the Constitution Act, 1982 ” (1999), 44 McGill L.J.  711). What s.  35(1) 
did was to give Aboriginal and treaty rights — which it explicitly recognizes as already 
“existing” — constitutional protection ( Van der Peet , at paras.  28-29). Even though 
some s.  35(1) Aboriginal rights would not have been recognized under pre -1982 
Canadian law ( Côté , at para.  52), the practices, c ustoms and traditions that underlie 
these rights existed before 1982. An interpretation of s.  35(1) that limits its scope to  
 those Aboriginal peoples who were located in Canada in 1982 would fail to give effect 
to this point by treating s.  35(1) as the sou rce of Aboriginal rights.  
(3) Additional Arguments  
[35] The parties and interveners made a range of additional arguments about the 
scope of s.  35(1). I do not take any of these arguments to be determinative, but will 
explain how they are consistent with the interp retation set out above.  
(a) Alternative Wording for Section 35(1)  
[36] Several parties made submissions on what the words “of Canada” in 
s. 35(1) must mean. Both the Crown and Mr. Desautel suggested alternative wording 
that might have been used instead, had the dra fters of the Constitution Act, 1982 , 
wished to exclude their favoured interpretations. I give these arguments no weight. As 
I explained earlier, the words used in s.  35(1) are capable of different meanings when 
considered in isolation.  
[37] However, the phrase  “aboriginal  peoples” does perhaps suggest those who 
were here originally  — before the Europeans — in line with the interpretation I have 
set out. As Lord Denning once wrote, “[t]he Indian peoples of Canada have been there 
from the beginning of time. So th ey are called the ‘aboriginal peoples’”: The Queen v. 
The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs , [1981] 4 C.N.L.R. 86 
(E.W.C.A.).   
 (b) Context Within the Constitution Act, 1982  
[38] The phrase “aboriginal peoples of Canada” is used elsewhere in the  
Constitution Act, 1982 . It is used in ss.  25 (“The guarantee in this Charter of certain 
rights and freedoms shall not be construed so as to abrogate or derogate from any 
aboriginal, treaty or other rights or freedoms that pertain to the aboriginal peoples  of 
Canada ”), 35(2) (“ In this Act, aboriginal peoples of Canada  includes the Indian, Inuit 
and Métis peoples of Canada”), 35.1( b) (“the Prime Minister of Canada will invite 
representatives of the aboriginal peoples of Canada  to participate in the discussions on 
[certain amendments to the Constitution]”), and the now -spent and repealed ss. 37(2) 
(“[The planned constitutional conference] shall have included in its agenda an item 
respecting constitutional matters that directly a ffect the aboriginal peoples of Canada , 
including the identification and definition of the rights of those peoples to be included 
in the Constitution of Canada, and the Prime Minister of Canada shall invite 
representatives of those peoples to participate i n the discussions on that item”)  and 
37.1(2) (“[Each other planned constitutional conference] shall have included in its 
agenda constitutional matters that directly affect the aboriginal peoples of Canada , and 
the Prime Minister of Canada shall invite repr esentatives of those peoples to participate 
in the discussions on those matters”).  
[39] While there may be reason to interpret the phrase “aboriginal peoples of 
Canada” in the same way across the Constitution Act, 1982 , this provides little 
assistance in the p resent appeal. Section  25 shields the rights and freedoms that pertain  
 to Aboriginal peoples of Canada from being abrogated by the Canadian Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms , but it does not tell us who those peoples are.  While the text of 
s. 35(2) defines Ab original peoples to include the Indian, Inuit and Métis peoples of 
Canada, this does not specify whether they must be citizens or residents of Canada.  
[40] Nor do I take anything from the requirement under s. 35.1 and the repealed 
ss. 37 and 37.1 that the Abor iginal peoples of Canada be represented at constitutional 
conferences. The Crown points out that representatives of the Lakes Tribe have not 
been invited to the constitutional conferences held so far. But the practice at these 
conferences was for Aborigina l peoples to be represented by umbrella organizations 
(see Native Women’s Assn. of Canada v. Canada , [1994] 3 S.C.R. 627, and 
R. Romanow, “Aboriginal Rights in the Constitutional Process”, in M. Boldt and 
J. A. Long, eds., The Quest for Justice: Aboriginal  Peoples and Aboriginal Rights 
(1985), 73). It is not clear that there would be any obstacle to Aboriginal peoples 
outside of Canada being represented in such processes. The requirement of 
representation at constitutional conferences thus offers no guidanc e here.  
(c) Legislative History  
[41] The Crown suggested that insight into the scope of s.  35(1) can be drawn 
from the Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence of the Special Joint Committee of the 
Senate and of the House of Commons on the Constitution of Canada . I agre e that 
drafting history can be relevant to constitutional interpretation (see R. v. Poulin , 2019 
SCC 47, at para.  78). But in this case it sheds no light. There is nothing in the record to  
 show that the members of the Committee turned their minds at all to  the question of 
non-citizen or non -resident Aboriginal peoples of Canada.  
(d) The 1930 Natural Resources Transfer Agreements  
[42] The Crown and the Attorney General of Saskatchewan submit that s. 35(1) 
should be interpreted similarly to the Natural Resources Trans fer Agreements 
(“NRTAs”), which were entered into between Canada and each of the Prairie provinces 
using nearly identical language, and added as schedules to the Constitution. The 
NRTAs use both the phrases “Indians of the Province” and “Indians within the  
boundaries thereof”.1 In Frank v. The Queen , [1978] S.C.R. 95, at pp.  101-2, this Court 
explained that the former was narrower than the latter, in that the latter included 
“Indians” who were passing through the province, not just those ordinarily resident  in 
the province. Respectfully, there is no reason why “aboriginal peoples of Canada” in 
s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 , should be interpreted the same way as “Indians 
of the Province” in the NRTAs. In Daniels v. Canada (Indian Affairs and Northern 
Development) , 2016 SCC 12, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 99, this Court held that s.  91(24) of the 
Constitution Act, 1867 , was broader than the NRTAs: the Métis are “Indians” under 
s. 91(24), but not under the NRTAs. The NRTAs, this Court explained, are 
                                                 
1 Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (Manitoba) (Schedule 1 of Constitution Act, 1930 , R.S.C. 1985, 
App. II, No. 26),  at paras. 11 and 13; Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (Alberta) (Schedule 2 of 
Constitution Act, 1930 , R.S.C. 1985, App. II, No. 26),  at paras. 10 and 12; Natural Resources Transfer 
Agreement  (Saskatchewan) (Schedule 3 of Constitution Act, 1930 , R.S.C. 1985, App. II, No. 2 6), at 
paras. 10 and 12.   
 “constitutional agreement[s], not the Constitution”, which requires “a completely 
different interpretive exercise” (para.  44).  
(e) The Presumption of Territoriality  
[43] The Crown notes that there is a presumption, rebuttable only by clear 
words or necessary implication, that legislation does not apply extraterritorially 
(Society of Composers, Authors and Music Publishers of Canada v. Canadian Assn. of 
Internet Providers , 2004 SCC 45, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 427, at paras.  54-55). As a result, it 
argue s, s. 35(1) should be presumed to apply only to groups within Canada, and nothing 
in the text rebuts that presumption. But the presumption has no effect here. 
Section  35(1) applies to groups outside of Canada only when claiming or exercising 
their rights w ithin Canada. The presumption of territoriality does not preclude such 
application, any more than it precludes the application of Canadian land laws to foreign 
owners of Canadian property.  
(f) Principles of Construction and the Aboriginal Perspective  
[44] Several i nterveners suggest that interpretive principles in favour of 
Aboriginal peoples are relevant here. Relatedly, Mr. Desautel and some interveners 
also suggest that Aboriginal perspectives should be taken into account in interpreting 
s. 35(1).   
 [45] The relevant i nterpretive principle is that, in interpreting s.  35(1), any 
doubt or ambiguity should be resolved in favour of Aboriginal peoples ( Van der Peet , 
at para.  25; Nowegijick v. The Queen , [1983] 1 S.C.R. 29, at p.  36). In my view, this 
principle does not help settle the question at issue here. A principle that ambiguities 
should be resolved in favour of Aboriginal peoples does not determine who those very 
Aboriginal peoples are. To attempt to use the principle in this way would be circular.  
[46] That said, Mr. Desau tel and several interveners explain that Aboriginal 
perspectives involve a strong connection to ancestral territory, even where the 
Aboriginal group has been dispossessed of that territory, or where the territory is now 
divided by international borders. As  this Court held in Sparrow , at p.  1112, it is 
“crucia[l] to be sensitive to the aboriginal perspective itself on the meaning of the rights 
at stake”. Therefore, “a morally and politically defensible conception of aboriginal 
rights will incorporate both [A boriginal and non -Aboriginal] legal perspectives” ( Van 
der Peet , at para.  49, citing M. Walters, “British Imperial Constitutional Law and 
Aboriginal Rights: A Comment on Delgamuukw v. British Columbia ”, (1992) 17 
Queen’s L.J.  350, at p. 413; see also J. Bo rrows, “Creating an Indigenous Legal 
Community” (2005), 50 McGill L.J. 153, at p.  173). This perspective confirms the 
interpretation of s.  35(1) which I set out above.  
(4) Application  
[47] I have concluded that the Aboriginal peoples of Canada under s.  35(1) are 
the modern -day successors of Aboriginal societies that occupied what is now Canada  
 at the time of European contact (subject to modifications that may be necessary in the 
case of the Métis). Where this is shown, the threshold question is met and the court 
ascertains the claimants’ rights using the Van der Peet test. The threshold question 
remains relevant in future cases where the claimant group is outside Canada, as Van 
der Peet  does not address the required link between the modern -day collective (outside 
Canada) and the historic collective (that was inside what is now Canada).  
[48] In the present case, the trial judge found as a fact that the Sinixt had 
occupied territory in what is now British Columbia at the time of European contact. 
She also found that the Lak es Tribe were a modern successor of the Sinixt — leaving 
open the possibility that there may be others. I would defer to this factual finding. The 
migration of the Lakes Tribe from British Columbia to a different part of their 
traditional territory in Wash ington did not cause the group to lose its identity or its 
status as a successor to the Sinixt.  
[49] This case does not require the Court to set out criteria for successorship of 
Aboriginal communities. This is a complex issue that should be dealt with on a fuller 
factual record, with the benefit of legal argument. For example, consideration would 
have to  be given to the possibility that a community may split over time, or, that two 
communities may merge into one, as well as to the relative significance of factors such 
as ancestry, language, culture, law, political institutions and territory in connecting a 
modern community to its historical predecessor. Some of the difficulties here are 
brought out in the academic literature (see P. L. A. H. Chartrand, “Background”, in  
 P. L. A. H. Chartrand, ed., Who are Canada’s Aboriginal Peoples? Recognition, 
Definition , and Jurisdiction  (2002), 27; R. K. Groves, “The Curious Instance of the 
Irregular Band: A Case Study of Canada’s Missing Recognition Policy” (2007), 70 
Sask. L.R.  153; and B. Olthuis, “The Constitution’s Peoples: Approaching Community 
in the Context of S ection 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982 ” (2009), 54 McGill L.J . 1).  
B. The Test for Aboriginal Rights  
[50] Having found that the Lakes Tribe is an Aboriginal people of Canada, the 
next question is whether Mr. Desautel’s claim satisfies the Van der Peet  test for a n 
Aboriginal right under s.  35(1). As I will explain, the test for Aboriginal rights for 
groups outside Canada is the same as the test for groups within Canada, and the trial 
judge did not err in finding that the test was satisfied here.  
(1) The Van der Peet  Test 
[51] The analysis under Van der Peet  was restated by this Court in Lax 
Kw’alaams Indian Band v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2011 SCC 56, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 
535, at para.  46: 
(a) Characterize the right claimed in light of the pleadings and evidence 
(Van der Peet , at para. 53; Gladstone , at para. 24;  Mitchell  at 
paras.  14-19). 
  
 (b) Determine whether the claimant has proven that a relevant pre -
contact practice, tradition or custom existed and was integral to the 
distinctive culture of the pre -contact society ( Van der P eet, at 
para.  46; Mitchell , at para. 12; Sappier , at paras. 40 -45). 
 
(c) Determine whether the claimed modern right is “demonstrably 
connected to, and reasonably regarded as a continuation of, the pre -
contact practice” ( Lax Kw’alaams , at para. 46).  
[52] This analy sis has been elaborated in detail in this Court’s jurisprudence. 
For present purposes, it will suffice to comment on the role of continuity in the analysis. 
Continuity is about whether a modern practice is a continuation of a historic practice. 
It is diffe rent from the threshold question discussed earlier, about whether a modern 
group is a successor of a historic group. It plays a role both at the second and the third 
stages of the Van der Peet analysis.  
[53] At the second stage of the Van der Peet analysis, con tinuity can play a role 
in proof. Showing that a practice is integral to the claimant’s culture today, and that it 
has continuity with pre -contact times, can count as proof that the practice was integral 
to the claimant’s culture pre -contact ( Van der Peet , at paras. 62 -63; Gladstone , at 
para.  28; Delgamuukw , at para. 152;  Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia , 2014 SCC 
44, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 257, at para. 45). As Kent McNeil explains, “ continuity of this sort 
has to be shown only when Aboriginal peoples rely on post -sovereignty occupation or  
 post-contact practices, customs, and traditions as evidence of their pre -sovereignty 
occupation or pre -contact practices, customs, and traditions” (“Continuity of 
Aboriginal Rights”, in K. Wilkins, ed., Advancing Aborigina l Claims: 
Visions/Strategies/Directions (2004), 127, at p. 138).  
[54] At the third stage, the question is whether the modern practice which is 
claimed to be an exercise of an Aboriginal right is connected to, and reasonably seen 
as a continuation of, the pre -contact practice. At this stage, continuity with the pre -
contact practice is required in order for the claimed activity to fall within the scope of 
the right. It serves to avoid frozen rights, allowing the practice to evolve into modern 
forms ( Van der Peet , at para. 64; Mitchell , at para. 13). The right claimed “must be 
allowed to evolve”, because “[i]f aboriginal rights are not permitted to evolve and take 
modern forms, then they will become utterly useless” ( Sappier , at paras. 48 -49). 
[55] I would emphasize that  the assessment of continuity, both at the second 
and third stages, is a highly fact -specific exercise. As McLachlin C.J. wrote in Mitchell , 
at para. 36, the weighing of evidence in Aboriginal claims “is generally the domain of 
the trial judge, who is best  situated to assess the evidence as it is presented, and is 
consequently accorded significant latitude in this regard” (see also Côté , at para.  59). 
(2) The Attorney General of Canada’s Proposed Framework  
[56] The intervener Attorney General of Canada submits that the proper 
approach to determine under what circumstances an Aboriginal claimant located  
 outside Canada can claim rights under s.  35(1) is a contextual one. In particular, it 
would require non -resident rights claimants to find a connection with a contempor ary 
Aboriginal collective residing  in Canada, and to obtain recognition and authorization 
by that collective to exercise the claimed s.  35(1) rights. The proposed test draws on R. 
v. Powley , 2003 SCC 43, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 207,  and on the jurisprudence on she ltering 
rights. As I will explain, I would not give effect to this proposal.  
[57] In Powley , the Court modified, though it did not overrule, the Van der Peet  
test to accommodate the particular situation of the Métis (see paras. 14 and 18). It also 
offered some comments on how courts can determine membership in the Métis 
community in the absence of formalized procedures (para.  29). Importantly, these 
comments w ere not about who is an “aboriginal peopl[e] of Canada” under s.  35(1), 
but rather about how courts can identify Métis individuals. The Court noted that 
“groups of Métis have often lacked political structures and have experienced shifts in 
their members’ s elf-identification” (para. 23), such that “determining membership in 
the Métis community might not be as simple as verifying membership in .  . . an Indian 
band” (para. 29). The Court in Powley suggested that an individual who self -identified 
as Métis also needed to show a link to a historic Métis community and acceptance by 
a modern successor of that community. This reflected the fact that not all people with 
both First Nations and European ancestry are Métis.  
[58] The idea of “sheltering” emerges from case law  concerning “whether an 
Aboriginal person can lawfully ‘shelter’ under a treaty he is not a signatory to” ( R. v.  
 Shipman , 2007 ONCA 338, 85 O.R. (3d) 585, at para. 2; R. v. Meshake , 2007 ONCA 
337, 85 O.R. (3d) 575, at paras. 1 -2). In these cases, the Ontar io Court of Appeal held 
that Aboriginal people from other communities can exercise treaty rights only if they 
have the permission or consent of the community that is a signatory to the treaty 
(Shipman , at paras. 41 -46), or as a result of marriage and accep tance in that community 
(Meshake , at paras. 31 -33). As this makes clear, the idea of sheltering arises from the 
specific context of treaty rights.  
[59] The Attorney General of Canada proposes that we adapt the Powley and 
sheltering frameworks to govern the sit uation of Aboriginal rights claimants outside 
Canada. In my view, there is no need to do so in this case. I certainly accept that 
Aboriginal rights must be grounded in the existence of a historic and present -day 
community ( Powley , at para. 24). As this Cou rt wrote in Marshall , at para.  67, 
“[m]odern -day claimants must establish a connection with the pre -sovereignty group 
upon whose practices they rely”. But this is so for Aboriginal groups inside or outside 
Canada. It does not support an additional requirem ent, for groups outside Canada, of 
recognition by a related Aboriginal collective residing in Canada.  
[60] This requirement would place a higher burden on Aboriginal communities 
who seek to claim rights if the group moved, was forced to move, or was divided by 
the creation of an international border between Canada and the United States. It would 
risk defining Aboriginal rights “in a manner which excludes some of those the 
provision was intended to protect” ( R. v.  Adams , [1996] 3 S.C.R. 101, at para.  27).  
 Moreove r, it would raise myriad practical difficulties, such as which group within 
Canada has a say in the recognition of a claimant located outside Canada, where there 
are competing groups ( Hwlitsum First Nation v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2018 
BCCA 276, 15 B. C.L.R. (6th) 91), which body can represent a collective residing in 
Canada ( Campbell v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests and Range) , 2011 BCSC 
448, [2011] 3 C.N.L.R. 151), and what happens if there is no related modern collective 
residing in Canada.  
[61] For these reasons, the test for an Aboriginal right is the same whether the 
claimant is inside or outside Canada.  
(3) Application  
[62] In the present case, the Aboriginal right claimed is a right to hunt for food, 
social and ceremonial purposes within the traditiona l territory of the Sinixt in British 
Columbia. The trial judge found, based on the evidence before her, that at the time of 
contact this practice was integral to the distinctive culture of the Sinixt. She also found 
that the modern -day practice of hunting in this territory, as Mr. Desautel did, is a 
continuation of this pre -contact practice. Indeed, setting aside the periods in which no 
hunting took place, there was no significant dissimilarity between the pre -contact 
practice and the modern one (as there w as, for example, in Lax Kw’alaams ). As a result, 
she found that Mr. Desautel was exercising an Aboriginal right.   
 [63] The Crown and the intervener Attorney General of Alberta submit that this 
was an error, because continuity requires an ongoing presence in the lands over which 
an Aboriginal right is asserted. As my discussion of continuity should make clear, this 
has never been part of the test for an Aboriginal right. Nor is there any basis for adding 
it to the test, even where the claimant is outside Canada. A s Lamer C.J. explained in 
Van der Peet , at para. 65, “an unbroken chain of continuity” is not required. Indeed, as 
McLachlin J. (dissenting, but not on this point) noted in Van der Peet , at para.  249, “it 
is not unusual for the exercise of a right to lapse  for a period of time”.   
[64] In effect, we are asked to hold that an Aboriginal right can be lost or 
abandoned by non -use: a proposition that Lamer C.J. left undecided in Van der Peet , 
at para.  63. Would accepting this proposition risk “undermining the very pu rpose of 
s. 35(1) by perpetuating the historical injustice suffered by aboriginal peoples at the 
hands of colonizers” ( Côté , at para. 53; see also McNeil, at pp. 133 -35)? It is better not 
to decide the issue here, as it does not arise in light of the factu al findings of the trial 
judge. The law should be developed through cases where determination of such issues 
is required, where there is an adequate evidentiary basis, and where the issues are the 
subject of full submissions and thorough consideration at t rial and at the appellate level.  
C. Sovereign Incompatibility  
[65] The Crown submits that even if Mr. Desautel’s claim would otherwise 
meet the test for an Aboriginal right, this right is incompatible with Canadian 
sovereignty because the right encompasses other rights necessary for its meaningful  
 exercise, which means a right to cross the Canada -U.S. border. This submission is 
supported by the Attorney General of Quebec, the Attorney General of New Brunswick 
and the Attorney General of Alberta. As a result, the C rown argues, Mr. Desautel’s 
right to hunt never came into existence.  
[66] I am of the view that, unlike  the right claimed in Mitchell , the very purpose 
of the right claimed by Mr. Desautel is not to cross the border. The mobility right, if it 
exists, is inciden tal in this case. Sovereign incompatibility would relate solely to the 
issue of whether there can be an Aboriginal right to enter Canada — an issue that is not 
raised here, because Mr. Desautel was not denied entry to Canada. Moreover, this issue 
was not f ully addressed by the courts below. Therefore, the question of whether the 
appropriate framework is sovereign incompatibility or infringement/justification under 
Sparrow  should be left for another day, when the Court has a proper set of facts to 
answer the  question.  
D. Common Law Aboriginal Rights  
[67] The Crown contends that while Mr. Desautel cannot have a s.  35(1) 
Aboriginal right, because he is not a member of an Aboriginal people of Canada, he 
can still have common law Aboriginal rights, albeit these rights w ould not constitute a 
defence to the regulatory charges against him. Recognizing common law Aboriginal 
rights alongside s.  35(1) Aboriginal rights would introduce additional difficulties. In 
particular, the Crown seems to assume that the test for a common law Aboriginal right  
 would be the same as the test for a s.  35(1) Aboriginal right, that is, the Van der Peet 
test. But this is far from clear.  
[68] Before 1982, common law Aboriginal rights were recognized in Canada 
under British imperial law ( Calder , at pp.  328 and 402;  Mitchell , at paras.  62-64). 
Under the imperial doctrine of succession, when Britain took possession of a new 
territory, the laws in force in that territory were presumed to continue (subject to some 
exceptions). This doctrine was not limited to practices, traditions or customs that were 
“integral to the distinctive culture” of the Aboriginal people, as in Van der Peet . This 
suggests, on the one hand, that the test for a common law right may be met even where 
the Van der Peet  test is not . 
[69] On the other hand, this Court has held that the existence of a common law 
Aboriginal right is sufficient to ground a s.  35(1) right ( Delgamuukw , at para.  136). 
Recognizing common law Aboriginal rights alongside s.  35(1) rights woul d require the 
Court to resolve this apparent tension. As Richard Ogden writes,  
while a legal historian might one day accept that the effect of the Van der 
Peet trilogy was to create a new test, and a new doctrine, the Supreme 
Court has stated that the doct rine which gives rise to section 35 rights is 
the same doctrine that gave rise to common law Aboriginal rights.  
 
(‘“Existing ’ Aboriginal Rights in Section 35 of the Constitution Act,  1982 ” 
(2009) , 88 Can. Bar Rev. 51, at p. 84; see also G. Otis, “Le titre  aborigène: 
émergence d’une figure nouvelle et durable du foncier autochtone?” 
(2005), 46 C. de D.  795, at p. 800.)   
 [70] However, in light of my conclusion that Mr. Desautel has a s.  35(1) 
Aboriginal right to hunt in the ancestral territory of the Sinixt in Bri tish Columbia,  it is 
not necessary to address this matter here.  
E. The Consequences of This Decision  
[71] The Crown and several attorneys general raised concerns about the 
possible consequences of groups like the Lakes Tribe being held to be Aboriginal 
peoples of  Canada. In this section, I explain why these concerns do not justify any 
change to the law as set out in these reasons. While Aboriginal communities outside 
Canada can assert and hold s. 35(1) rights, it does not follow that their rights are the 
same as t hose of communities within Canada. While the test for an Aboriginal right is 
the same, the different circumstances of communities outside Canada may lead to 
different results.  
(1) The Duty to Consult  
[72] The duty to consult “arises when the Crown has knowledge, r eal or 
constructive, of the potential existence of the Aboriginal right or title and contemplates 
conduct that might adversely affect it” ( Haida , at para.  35). In other words, three 
conditions must exist for the duty to arise: actual or constructive knowledge, 
contemplated Crown conduct and a potential adverse effect on an Aboriginal or treaty 
right. The requirement of actual or constructive knowl edge was clarified in Rio Tinto  
 Alcan Inc. v. Carrier Sekani Tribal Council , 2010 SCC 43, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 650, at 
para.  40: 
Actual knowledge arises when a claim has been filed in court or advanced 
in the context of negotiations, or when a treaty right may be impacted. 
Constructive knowledge arises when lands are known or reasonably 
suspected to have been traditionally occupied by an Aboriginal community 
or an impact on rights may reasonably be anticipated. [Citations omitted.]  
[73] As I will explain, given the r equirement of actual or constructive 
knowledge, the duty to consult may well operate differently as regards those outside 
Canada.  
[74] Given the long history of Crown -Aboriginal relations in Canada, the 
Crown will often be aware of the existence of Aboriginal groups within Canada and 
may have some sense of their claims. The situation is different when it comes to 
Aboriginal groups outside of Canada. In the absence of some historical interaction with 
them, the Crown may not know, or have any reason to know, that  they exist, let alone 
that they have potential rights within Canadian territory.  
[75] There is no freestanding duty on the Crown to seek out Aboriginal groups, 
including those outside Canada, in the absence of actual or constructive knowledge of 
a potential i mpact on their rights. In the absence of such knowledge, the Crown is free 
to act. It is for the groups involved to put the Crown on notice of their claims ( Native 
Council of Nova Scotia v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2008 FCA 113, [2008] 3 
C.N.L.R. 286; Mississaugas of Scucog Island First Nation v.  National Automobile,  
 Aerospace, Transportation and General Workers Union of Canada (CAW -Canada), 
Local 444 , 2007 ONCA 814, 88 O.R. (3d) 583, at para.  59).  
[76] Once the Crown is put on notice, however, it has to dete rmine whether a 
duty to consult arises and, if so, what the scope of the duty is. As I mentioned earlier, 
consultation is part of a “process of fair dealing and reconciliation” which “arises .  . . 
from the Crown’s assertion of sovereignty” ( Haida , at para.  32). Because groups 
outside Canada are not implicated in this process to the same degree, the scope of the 
Crown’s duty to consult with them, and the manner in which it is given effect, may 
differ. Integrating groups outside Canada into consultations by t he Crown with groups 
inside Canada may involve discussions within Aboriginal communities and with the 
Crown. While the consultation process may be more challenging when it involves 
groups outside Canada, as this Court said in Powley , at para. 49, “ the diff iculty of 
identifying members of the [Aboriginal] community must not be exaggerated as a basis 
for defeating their rights under the Constitution of Canada”.  
(2) Justifying Infringements of Aboriginal Rights  
[77] The fact that an Aboriginal group is outside Canada i s relevant to the 
Sparrow test for justifying an infringement of an Aboriginal or treaty right.  
[78] This Court has emphasized the role of context in determining whether an 
infringement of an Aboriginal right is justified. In Sparrow , at p.  1111, the Court note d 
“the importance of context and a case -by-case approach to s.  35(1)”, writing that “in  
 light of the complexities of aboriginal history, society and rights, the contours of a 
justificatory standard must be defined in the specific factual context of each ca se.” This 
point was applied in Gladstone , at para.  56, where Lamer C.J. wrote that  
the framework for analysing aboriginal rights laid out in Sparrow  depends 
to a considerable extent on the legal and factual context of that appeal. In 
this case, where .  . . the context varies significantly from that in Sparrow , 
it will be necessary to revisit the Sparrow  test and to adapt the justification 
test it lays out  . . . .  
[79] The fact that the holder of an Aboriginal right is located outside of Canada 
is a feature of the context that may be taken into account in the justification analysis. 
The government’s power to infringe Aboriginal rights reflects the fact that “rights do 
not exist in a vacuum” ( R. v. Nikal , [1996] 1 S.C.R. 1013, at para. 92). Rather, 
Aboriginal peo ples are part of “a broader social, political and economic community” 
whose interests may, where sufficiently important, justify infringement of Aboriginal 
rights ( Gladstone , at para. 73). In sum, justifying an infringement involves reconciling 
the interes ts of an Aboriginal people with the interests of the broader community of 
which it is a part ( Tsilhqot’in , at para. 118). The extent to which the fact that the holder 
of the Aboriginal right is an Aboriginal people located outside this broader community 
makes a difference in the justification analysis is another issue better determined where 
on the facts this is required, where there is an adequate evidentiary basis, and where 
the issues are the subject of full submissions and thorough consideration at tria l and at 
the appellate level.  
(3) Aboriginal Title   
 [80] The present case involves an Aboriginal right to hunt for food, social and 
ceremonial purposes. It does not involve a claim for Aboriginal title. Aboriginal title is 
not a right to carry out an activity, but a  right to the land itself ( Delgamuukw , at 
paras.  137-41). While the test for Aboriginal title has the same basic structure as the 
test for other Aboriginal rights, it also has some important differences (paras.  144-45 
and 150 -51). First, unlike other Abori ginal rights, the historic date for proof of 
Aboriginal title is the date of Crown sovereignty, not the date of contact. Second, while 
other Aboriginal rights require proving that a practice was integral to the distinctive 
culture of the Aboriginal society , Aboriginal title requires proof of exclusive 
occupation of territory, without any additional need to show that this occupation was 
culturally integral.  
[81] Given these special features of the test for Aboriginal title, and given that 
the present case does n ot involve a title claim, I would leave for another day the 
differences that may exist between the test for Aboriginal title claims by Aboriginal 
peoples within Canada and the test for such claims by peoples outside Canada.  
(4) Modern Treaties   
 [82] Some modern treaties make provision for Aboriginal individuals who are 
not Canadian citizens to have treaty rights.2 Other treaties exclude this possibility.3 The 
intervener Attorney General of the Yukon Territory asks us to be mindful of these 
treaties in deciding the present case. I agree that m odern treaties, being the result of 
lengthy negotiations, should be considered with great respect ( Beckman , at paras . 9-10 
and 12, per Binnie J.; at paras. 111 -12 and 203, per Deschamps J. (concurring); First 
Nation of Nacho Nyak Dun v. Yukon , 2017 SCC 58, [2017] 2 S.C.R. 576, at paras. 1, 
33 and 38). However, the content of these treaties does not determine the proper 
interpretation of “aboriginal peoples of Canada” under s.  35(1). Nor does the  proper 
interpretation of “aboriginal peoples of Canada” under s.  35(1) undermine the rights 
set out in these modern treaties.  
F. The Vindication of Aboriginal Rights  
[83] As I mentioned  at the outset of these reasons, beyond agreeing with 
Mr. Desautel on the central issue, I have said little more about what this means for the 
                                                 
2 See for example: Carcross/Tagish First Nation Final Agreement (2005), vol.  1, c. 3, ss. 3.2.2 to 3.2.3; 
Champagne and Aishihik First Nations Final Agreement (1993), vol.  1, c. 3, ss. 3.2.2 to 3.2.3; Kluane 
First Nation Final Agre ement (2003), vol.  1, c. 3, ss.  3.2.2 to 3.2.3; Kwanlin Dun First Nation Final 
Agreement (2005), vol.  1, c. 3, ss.  3.2.2 to 3.2.3; Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation Agreement(1997), 
vol. 1, c. 3, ss.  3.2.2 to 3.2.3; First Nation of Nacho Nyak Dun Final A greement (1993), vol.  1, c. 3, 
ss. 3.2.2 to 3.2.3; Selkirk First Nation Final Agreement (1997), vol.  1, c. 3, ss.  3.2.2 to 3.2.3; Ta’an 
Kwach’an Council Final Agreement (2002), vol.  1, c. 3, ss.  3.2.2 to 3.2.3; Teslin Tlingit Council Final 
Agreement (1993) , vol.  1, c. 3, ss.  3.2.2 to 3.2.3; Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in Final Agreement (1998), vol.  1, 
c. 3, ss.  3.2.2 to 3.2.3; Vuntut Gwitchin First Nation Final Agreement (1993), vol.  1, c. 3, ss.  3.2.2 to 
3.2.3.  
3 See for example: Gwich’in Comprehensive Land Claim Agre ement  (1992) , vol. 1, c. 4; Sahtu Dene 
and Metis Comprehensive Land Claim Agreement  (1993), vol.  1, c. 4.  
 exercise of s.  35(1) Aboriginal rights. I end with some comments on the means 
available for the vindication of Ab original rights.  
(1) It Is for the Courts to Interpret Section 35(1)  
[84] This Court has to be mindful of its proper role in the vindication of 
Aboriginal rights. As this Court held in Hunter  v. Southam Inc. , [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145, 
at p. 169, “the courts are guardian s of the Constitution and of individuals’ rights under 
it”. The role of giving an authoritative interpretation of laws and of the Constitution 
belongs to the courts (H. Brun, G. Tremblay and E. Brouillet, Droit constitutionnel  (6th 
ed. 2014), at pp. 808 -9, no. X.11 and X.13).  
[85] When the existing Aboriginal and treaty rights of the Aboriginal peoples 
of Canada were recognized and affirmed by the enactment of the Constitution Act, 
1982 , this gave rise to an obligation for the courts to “give effect to that nati onal 
commitment” ( R. v. Marshall , [1999] 3 S.C.R. 533 (“ Marshall No. 2 ”), at para.  45). As 
the majority of this Court recently confirmed in Uashaunnuat , at para.  24: 
Although s. 35(1) recognizes and affirms “the existing aboriginal and 
treaty rights of the  aboriginal peoples of Canada”, defining those rights is 
a task that has fallen largely to the courts. The honour of the Crown 
requires a generous and purposive interpretation of this provision in 
furtherance of the objective of reconciliation.  [Emphasis a dded, citation 
omitted.]  
  
 [86] In my view, the authoritative interpretation of s. 35(1) of the Constitution 
Act, 1982 , is for the courts. It is for Aboriginal peoples, however, to define themselves 
and to choose by what means to make their decisions, according to their own laws, 
customs and practices.  
(2) Negotiation Can Foster Reconciliation  
[87] Negotiation has significant advantages for both the Crown and Aboriginal 
peoples as a way to obtain clarity about Aboriginal rights:  
Negotiation .  . . has the potential of producing outcomes that are better 
suited to the parties’ interests, while the range of remedies available to a 
court is narrower. .  . . The settlement of indigenous claims [has] an 
inescapable political dimension that is best handled  through direct 
negotiation.  
 
(S. Grammond, Terms of Coexistence, Indigenous Peoples and Canadian 
Law (2013),  at p. 139)  
Negotiation also provides certainty for both parties  (Beckman , at para. 109, per  
Deschamps J., concurring). As the Court said in Clyde River (Hamlet) v. Petroleum 
Geo-Services Inc. , 2017 SCC 40, [2017] 1 S.C.R. 1069, at para. 24, “[t]rue 
reconciliation is rarely, if ever, achieved in courtrooms”.  
[88] Good faith from both parties is required. As the Court said in Haida , at 
para.  25, the honour  of the Crown “requires the Crown .  . . to participate in processes 
of negotiation”  (see also B. Slattery, “Aboriginal Rights and the Honour of the Crown”  
 (2005), 29 S.C.L.R. (2d) 434, at pp. 436 -37). Reconciliation requires the Crown and 
Aboriginal people  to “work together to reconcile their interests” ( Rio Tinto , at para.  34; 
see also Nacho Nyak Dun , at para. 1).  
[89] As this Court has held on many occasions, the Crown has an “ obligation to 
achieve the just settlement of Aboriginal claims through the treaty p rocess” ( Rio Tinto , 
at para. 32; see also Haida , at para. 20) because other remedies “have proven time -
consuming, expensive, and are often ineffective” ( Rio Tinto , at para. 33). Nonetheless, 
a test case or a claim for declaratory relief are also appropriate means to ask courts to 
determine rights under s.  35(1).  
[90] When parties are considering possible courses of action, it is useful to bear 
in mind that criminal and regulatory proc eedings have inherent limits proper to their 
nature. In these types of cases, the evidence administered at trial is generally less 
extensive and the rules are different than in a reference or a declaratory action (see 
Sparrow , at p. 1095; Marshall No. 2 , at para. 13) . As LeBel J. stressed in his concurring 
reasons in Marshall , at para. 142:  
Although many of the aboriginal rights cases that have made their way 
to this Court began by way of summary conviction proceedings, it is clear 
to me that we should re -think the appropriateness of litigating aboriginal 
treaty, rights and title issues in the context of criminal trials.  The issues that 
are determined in the context of these cases have little to do with the 
criminality of the accused’s conduct; rather, the c laims would properly be 
the subject of civil actions for declarations.  Procedural and evidentiary 
difficulties inherent in adjudicating aboriginal claims arise not only out of 
the rules of evidence, the interpretation of evidence and the impact of the 
relevant evidentiary burdens, but also out of the scope of appellate review 
of the trial judge’s findings of fact. These claims may also impact on the  
 competing rights and interests of a number of parties who may have a right 
to be heard at all stages of the p rocess.  In addition, special difficulties come 
up when dealing with broad title and treaty rights claims that involve 
geographic areas extending beyond the specific sites relating to the 
criminal charges. [Emphasis added.]  
[91] Therefore, [ TRANSLATION ] “[t]he negotiating table should not be seen as a 
substitute for the courtroom, nor the courtroom as an alternative to the negotiating 
table” (P. Dionne, “La reconnaissance et la définition contemporaines des droits 
ancestraux: négocier ou s’adresser au j uge?”, in G. Otis, ed., Droit, territoire et 
gouvernance des peuples autochtones  (2005), 71, at p. 78). Both processes are 
complementary to each other and must interact with each other within their proper 
limits.  
[92]  All this said, it is for the parties thems elves to decide how they wish to 
proceed.  
VI. Disposition  
[93] The appeal is dismisse d. The constitutional question is answered in the 
affirmative.  
 
The following are the reasons delivered by  
 
 CÔTÉ J. —   
 [94] Does the constitutional protection of Aboriginal rights contained in s.  35(1) 
of the Constitution Act, 1982 , extend to an Aboriginal group located outside of Canada, 
and whose member claiming to exercise an Aboriginal right is neither a resident nor a 
citizen of Canada? The courts below, and my colleague Rowe  J., say that it does, but 
in my view, and with respect, that conclusion is contrary to a purposive analysis of 
s. 35(1) that examines the linguistic, philosophic, and historical contexts of that 
provis ion. This Court’s s.  35(1) jurisprudence has characterized  — properly, in my 
view  — reconciliation in terms of the relationship between non -Aboriginal Canadians 
and Aboriginal peoples as full and equal members of, and participants in, Canadian 
society. In addition, s.  35(1) elevated to constitutional status the common law rights of 
the “aboriginal peoples of Canada” that were “existing” in 1982 ( Mitchell v. M.N.R. , 
2001 SCC 33, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 911, at para.  11). Aboriginal groups located outside of 
Canada’s  borders do not fit within this understanding.  
[95] Further, even if I would agree with my colleague’s conclusion that the 
scope of the phrase “aboriginal peoples of Canada” includes groups located outside of 
Canada, I would disagree with his application of the  test set out in R. v. Van der Peet , 
[1996] 2 S.C.R. 507, to the claim brought in this case by the respondent, 
Richard  Lee Desautel. In my view, Mr.  Desautel, as a member of the Lakes Tribe, 
cannot establish that he was exercising an Aboriginal right to hu nt in the Sinixt 
traditional territory in British Columbia, as the modern group’s claim lacks continuity 
with the pre -contact group’s practices. Given that there was nothing in existence in 
1982 to which s.  35(1) protection could attach, Mr.  Desautel’s cla im must fail.   
 [96] Therefore, I would answer the constitutional question in the negative and 
allow the appeal.  
I. Background  
[97] This was a test case brought by the Lakes Tribe of the Colville 
Confederated Tribes (“CCT”) based in Washington State in the United State s of 
America. Acting on the instructions of the Fish and Wildlife Director of the CCT, 
Mr. Desautel  — a United States citizen and resident, and a member of the Lakes 
Tribe  — shot a cow -elk near Castlegar, British  Columbia, to secure ceremonial meat. 
He rep orted the kill to conservation officers and was subsequently charged with hunting 
without a licence and hunting big game while not being a resident of British Columbia, 
contrary to ss.  11(1) and 47(a) of the Wildlife Act , R.S.B.C. 1996, c.  488. 
[98] An agreed s tatement of facts was entered at trial. Mr.  Desautel admitted the 
actus reus of each offence. His sole defence was that he was exercising his Aboriginal 
right to hunt for ceremonial purposes in the traditional territory of his Sinixt ancestors 
pursuant to s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 . As such, the trial became, as 
intended, a test case on whether the Lakes Tribe is part of the “aboriginal peoples of 
Canada”.  
II. Issue  
[99] The following constitutional question is raised by this appeal:   
 Are ss.  11(1) and 47 (a) of the Wildlife Act , R.S.B.C. 1996, c.  488, as they 
read in October 2010, of no force or effect with respect to the respondent, 
being a member of the Lakes Tribe of the Confederated Tribes of the 
Colville Reservation in Washington State, U.S.A., in vir tue of s.  52 of the 
Constitution Act, 1982 , by reason of an Aboriginal right within the 
meaning of s.  35 of the Constitution Act, 1982 , invoked by the respondent?  
 
(A.R., vol.  I, at p.  139) 
III. Analysis  
A. A Purposive Interpretation of Section  35 Establishes That  It Protects Only 
Aboriginal Peoples Located in Canada  
[100]  Constitutional provisions conferring rights ought to be interpreted 
generously, but must also be placed in their proper contexts in order to avoid 
overshooting their actual purposes. As noted in R. v. Blais , 2003 SCC 44, [2003] 2 
S.C.R. 236, “this Court is not free to invent new obligations foreign to the original 
purpose of the provision at issue. The analysis must be anchored in the historical 
context of the provision” (para.  40). Such judicial cautio n is entirely appropriate and in 
line with Binnie  J.’s emphasis on the fact that “‘[g]enerous’ rules of interpretation 
should not be confused with a vague sense of after -the-fact largesse” ( R. v. Marshall , 
[1999] 3 S.C.R. 456, at para.  14).  
[101]  Section  35(1) accords constitutional protection only to the rights of the 
“aboriginal peoples of Canada”. The courts below correctly held that s.  35(1) is to be 
interpreted purposively, but rather than undertaking a purposive analysis to determine 
the meaning of the phr ase “aboriginal peoples of Canada”, they relied on the Van der  
 Peet test to conceptualize the rights referred to in s.  35(1). As stated by the Court of 
Appeal (2019 BCCA 151, 24 B.C.L.R. (6th) 48, at para.  57): “Simply put, if the Van 
der Peet requirements  are met, the modern Indigenous community will be an 
‘[a]boriginal peoples of Canada’.”  
[102]  I am in agreement with my colleague Rowe  J. on the following point: the 
question of whether a claimant falls within the meaning of “aboriginal peoples of 
Canada” in s.  35 is a threshold question; this question should be answered separately 
from the Van der Peet analysis for determining whether a group has an Aboriginal 
right; and the trial judge was required to address this threshold question to determine 
whether the Lak es Tribe fell within s.  35’s purview. As noted by the appellant , Her 
Majesty the Queen in Right of British Columbia (the “Crown”), “the Van der Peet test 
identifies what  comes within the scope of s.  35 as a right, not who comes within the 
scope of s.  35 as  a rights holder” (A.F., at para.  59 (emphasis in original)). The Van der 
Peet test addresses the scope of Aboriginal rights but does not speak to treaty rights, 
Aboriginal title, or the rights of the Métis, which are also encompassed within s.  35(1). 
Usin g the test as proposed by the courts below defines “aboriginal peoples of Canada” 
solely in terms of occupation prior to contact, which is inconsistent with this Court’s 
acknowledgment that s.  35(1) rights “may only be exercised by virtue of an individual’ s 
ancestrally based membership in the present community” ( R. v. Powley , 2003 SCC 43, 
[2003] 2 S.C.R. 207, at para.  24).   
 [103]  However, I disagree with my colleague’s conclusion that the scope of 
“aboriginal peoples of Canada” for the purposes of s.  35(1) must m ean the modern -day 
successors of Aboriginal societies that occupied Canadian territory at the time of 
European contact and that, as a result, groups that are not located in Canada or whose 
members are not and never have been citizens or residents of Canada  can be “aboriginal 
peoples of Canada”.  
[104]  In my view, to be entitled to the protection of s.  35(1), the modern -day 
successor groups cannot be located anywhere other than in Canada. A purposive 
analysis of s.  35(1) that has regard to the relevant linguistic,  philosophic, and historical 
contexts of that provision establishes that it protects only Aboriginal peoples located 
within Canada. This approach, while dismissed by the Court of Appeal as “formalistic”, 
is entirely consistent with this Court’s guidance th at s. 35(1) must be interpreted in a 
generous manner consistent with its intended purpose ( Manitoba Metis Federation Inc. 
v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2013 SCC 14, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 623, at para.  76; see also 
R. v. Sparrow , [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075, at p.  1106;  Van der Peet , at para.  23).  
[105]  As Rowe J. recently confirmed, “[s.]  35 rights are not absolute. Like other 
provisions of the Constitution Act, 1982 , s. 35 is both supported and confined by 
broader constitutional principles” ( Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Can ada (Governor 
General in Council) , 2018 SCC 40, [2018] 2 S.C.R. 765, at para.  153). As I will outline 
below, the framers’ intent was to protect the rights of Aboriginal groups that are  
 members of, and participants in, Canadian society. It has no interest i n protecting 
groups that, plainly, have no connection to it.  
(1) Linguistic Context  
[106]  It is a well -established presumption of statutory and constitutional 
interpretation that each and every word of a text must be given meaning. This follows 
from the assumption that the legislature avoids tautology: “it does not use words solely 
for rhetoric al or aesthetic effect” (R.  Sullivan, Statutory Interpretation  (3rd ed. 2016), 
at p. 43). As Sullivan explains, “[i]t is presumed that every feature of a legislative text 
has been deliberately chosen and has a particular role to play in the legislative des ign” 
(p. 43). This is consonant with this Court’s direction in Caron v. Alberta , 2015 SCC 
56, [2015] 3 S.C.R. 511, that the guiding principles of purposive interpretation “do not 
undermine the primacy of the written text of the Constitution” (para.  36, cit ing 
Reference re Secession of Quebec , [1998] 2 S.C.R. 217, at para.  53), and that 
“constitutional interpretation must nonetheless begin with the language of the 
constitutional law or provision in question” (para.  37, quoting British Columbia 
(Attorney Gene ral) v. Canada (Attorney General) , [1994] 2 S.C.R. 41, at p.  88). 
[107]  The summary conviction appeal judge held that “the meaning of s.  35 is 
not plain and obvious” with respect to the term “aboriginal peoples of Canada”, because 
the section does not expressly limit the protection of rights to Aboriginal peoples who 
reside in Canada or whose members are Canadian citizens (2017 BCSC 2389, [2018] 
1 C.N.L.R. 135, at para.  42). However, a textual analysis reveals the significance of the  
 drafters’ choice to include t he phrase “of Canada” and “ du Canada ” rather than leaving 
the term “aboriginal peoples” and “ peuples autochtones ” without any qualifier. For 
one, the use of the word “of” with reference to a place imports dwelling “and is 
ordinarily taken to mean that the person spoken of dwells at the place named” ( Stroud’s 
Judicial Dictionary of Words and Phrases  (10th ed.  2020), vol.  2, at p.  889). The 
presumption against tautology carries considerable weight ( Placer Dome Canada Ltd. 
v. Ontario (Minister of Finance) , 200 6 SCC 20, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 715, at  para.  46). It 
follows that the inclusion of the words “of Canada” cannot be seen as superfluous. This 
is particularly true when the word “of”, which is ordinarily taken to import dwelling, 
is used in combination with a cle ar geographical location such as “Canada”.  
[108]  The presumption of consistent expression also sheds light on how the 
phrase “of Canada” in s.  35 ought to be interpreted. As Sullivan notes:  
It is presumed that the legislature uses language carefully and 
consist ently so that within a statute or other legislative instrument the same 
words have the same meaning and different words have different 
meanings. Another way of understanding this presumption is to say that 
the legislature is presumed to avoid stylistic var iation. Once a particular 
way of expressing a meaning has been adopted, it is used each time that 
meaning is intended.  
 
(Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes  (6th ed. 2014), at p.  217) 
Similar limiting language is used repeatedly in the Constitution A ct, 1982 , as a 
geographical qualifier: for example, “citizen of Canada” (ss.  3, 6 and 23), “official 
languages of Canada” (s.  16), “government of Canada” (ss.  20, 32 and 36), and 
“Constitution of Canada” (s.  21). Interpreting “aboriginal peoples of Canada”  in a more  
 expansive fashion would be incongruent with this presumption and contrary to the 
intention of the drafters.  
[109]  This Court considered the meaning of similar language in Blais and in 
Frank v. The Queen , [1978] 1 S.C.R. 95.  In Blais , the Court did no t accept that Métis 
peoples fell within the meaning of “Indians” in the harvesting clause of the Manitoba 
Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (“NRTA ”), in part because of how that term 
was used elsewhere in the agreement:  
The placement of para.  13 in the part of the NRTA  entitled “Indian 
Reserves”, along with two other provisions that clearly do not apply to the 
Métis, supports the view that the term “Indian” as used throughout this part 
was not seen as including the Métis.  This placement weighs against th e 
argument that we should construe the term “Indians” more broadly than 
otherwise suggested by the historical context of the NRTA  and the common 
usage of the term at the time of the NRTA ’s enactment. [Emphasis added; 
para.  30.] 
In Frank , this Court interpr eted the phrase “Indians of the Province” in Alberta’s NRTA 
as having a narrower meaning than “Indians within the boundaries thereof”, a phrase 
also used in the agreement. In finding that “Indians of the Province” meant Alberta 
Indians, this Court read the  phrase in its ordinary grammatical sense and appropriately 
imposed a geographical qualifier.   
[110]  In British Columbia v. Imperial Tobacco Canada Ltd. , 2005 SCC 49, 
[2005] 2 S.C.R. 473, at para.  65, this Court cautioned against an interpretation that 
would “r ender  . . . constitutional rights redundant and, in doing so, undermine the  
 delimitation of those rights chosen by our constitutional framers”. In my view, the 
majority’s approach would do just that. An interpretation of “aboriginal peoples of 
Canada” that  includes groups not located in Canada or whose members are not and 
never were citizens or residents of Canada gives the words “of Canada” no meaning. 
The words are not necessary for logic or for grammatical purposes, in opposition to the 
presumption again st tautology. The explicit inclusion of the Métis peoples in s.  35(2) 
is a further indication that the intent of the framers was not to constitutionalize, as my 
colleague notes, “rights and relationships that arise from the prior occupation of Canada 
by A boriginal societies” (para.  31), but instead to elevate all existing Aboriginal rights 
held by Aboriginal peoples who were in Canada in 1982 to constitutional status, 
regardless of whether their societies existed pre -contact or pre -control. The use of the 
words “of Canada” in the rest of the Constitution Act, 1982 , is clearly meant to narrow 
the scope of the rights being constitutionalized through geographical qualifier. It would 
be incongruent to interpret “aboriginal peoples of Canada” differently.  
(2) Philo sophic Context  
[111]  The philosophic context helps explain why residence or citizenship is not 
referenced in s.  35, but is assumed. As this Court noted in Van der Peet , at paras.  18-19, 
whereas Charter rights are, in the liberal enlightenment view, “general and universal”,  
[a]boriginal rights cannot  . . . be defined on the basis of the 
philosophical precepts of the liberal enlightenment. Although equal in 
importance and significance to the rights enshrined in the Charter , 
aboriginal rights must be viewed differe ntly from Charter  rights because  
 they are rights held only by aboriginal members of Canadian society . 
[Emphasis added; emphasis in original deleted.]  
[112]  This characterization has been reflected in this Court’s view of 
reconciliation between the Aboriginal peo ples of Canada and the Crown. Writing for 
the majority in Beckman v. Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation , 2010 SCC 53, [2010] 
3 S.C.R. 103, at para.  10, Binnie  J. described s.  35’s “grand purpose” as being the 
“reconciliation of Aboriginal and non -Aborigin al Canadians  in a mutually respectful 
long-term relationship” (emphasis added). Later in Beckman , Binnie  J. expanded on 
s. 35’s purpose, implicitly signalling the centrality of residency in the formulation of 
s. 35:   
The decision to entrench in s.  35 of t he Constitution Act, 1982  the 
recognition and affirmation of existing Aboriginal and treaty rights, 
signalled a commitment by Canada’s political leaders to protect and 
preserve constitutional space for Aboriginal peoples to be Aboriginal. At 
the same time,  Aboriginal people do not, by reason of their Aboriginal 
heritage, cease to be citizens who fully participate with other Canadians in 
their collective governance. [para.  33] 
[113]  By framing s.  35(1) as a provision “granting special constitutional 
protection to one part of Canadian society” ( Van der Peet , at para.  20), this Court has 
consistently understood s.  35(1) to import a residency or citizenship requirement. As 
Binnie  J. stated in Mitchell , Aboriginal rights, as defined by this Court, “find their 
source in  an earlier age, but they have not been frozen in time  . . . . They are projected 
into modern Canada where they are exercised as group rights in the 21st century by 
modern Canadians who wish  . . . to protect their aboriginal identity” (para.  132).   
 [114]  As Lame r C.J. held in Van der Peet , at para.  21, s.  35(1)’s purpose should 
be understood in relation to “the interests it was meant to protect” (citing R. v. Big M 
Drug Mart Ltd. , [1985] 1 S.C.R. 295, at p.  344). Section  35 protects Aboriginal peoples 
“as full pa rticipants with non -aboriginal peoples in a shared Canadian sovereignty” 
(Mitchell , at para.  135). The protections, therefore, do not and cannot apply to 
Aboriginal groups in other countries. It cannot be said that these groups “fully 
participate with othe r Canadians in their collective governance” ( Beckman , at para.  33), 
nor do they “live and contribute as part of our national diversity” ( Mitchell , at 
para.  132). It is this reality which must colour the scope and content of the expression 
“aboriginal peopl es of Canada”.  
(3) Historical Context  
[115]  Additionally, the historical record does not show that expanding the 
protections of s.  35(1) to non -Canadian Aboriginal groups was ever considered. In fact, 
the limited historical sources that could provide guidance as to  the meaning of the 
expression “aboriginal peoples of Canada” show an intention to limit the constitutional 
protection of Aboriginal rights to only those groups located within Canada.  
[116]  The Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence of the Special Joint Committee 
of the Senate and of the House of Commons on the Constitution of Canada (“Minutes ”), 
at the time of discussions around the patriation of Canada’s Constitution, reflect an 
implicit shared understanding among committee participants, including governmental 
and Aboriginal representatives, that s.  35(1) was intended to protect the rights of  
 Aboriginal communities located in Canada at that time. For instance, the Honourable 
Jean Chrétien, then the Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada, described 
how the Constitution Act, 1982 , would protect “the rights of all the native Canadians” 
that exist under the treaties or the Royal Proclamation, “the two sources of rights that 
exist for the natives in Canada” ( Minutes , No.  3, 1st Sess., 32 nd Parl., 
November  12, 1980, at p.  84; Minutes , No.  4, 1st Sess., 32nd Parl., 
November  13, 1980, at p.  13). George Braden, representing the Northwest Territories 
government, noted that “Native people in Canada have enjoyed a special status which 
must be clearly recognized in t he constitution of Canada” ( Minutes , No.  12, 1st Sess., 
32nd Parl., November  25, 1980, at p.  60). The statements made by Aboriginal 
representatives before the committee similarly assumed the existence of a geographical 
limitation. When discussing proposed amendments, Mary Simon, a representative of 
the Inuit Committee on National Issues, stated the following:  
Subsection (1) of section 23A [a proposed Aboriginal rights and 
freedoms provision] merely provides for the obvious, namely, that the 
aboriginal peopl es of Canada include Canada’s three groups of indigenous 
peoples. Presently, there exist other artificial distinctions under Canadian 
law which have posed considerable problems for a great number of 
aboriginal people in Canada and for which we must seek al ternative 
solutions.   
 
(Minutes , No.  16, 1st Sess., 32nd Parl., December 1, 1980, at p.  13) 
 
Logically, Ms.  Simon’s reference to “Canada’s three groups” could only refer to 
present -day Aboriginal groups residing and present in Canada, thus implying a 
geographical component.   
 [117]  There are also some remarks in the Minutes that explicitly reference a 
geographical limitation on the meaning of “aboriginal peoples of Canada”. For 
example, in response to a question about defining the word “Indian”, Nellie  Carlson , 
the Western Vice President of Indian Rights for Indian Women, stated that “[m]y 
definition of an Indian across Canada is  . . . an Indian who had been born and raised in 
this country, who had never come from across the ocean to immigrate into this country , 
but was born and raised, had lived through the hardships” ( Minutes , No.  17, 1st Sess., 
32nd Parl., December  2, 1980, at p.  97).  
[118]  The Court of Appeal dismissed the Minutes as “non -specific in their 
application” and as not informing the constitutional inte rpretation of s.  35(1) (para.  64). 
My colleague concurs, finding that the Minutes “she[d] no light” (Rowe  J.’s reasons, 
at para.  41). Respectfully, this view overlooks the compelling evidence outlined above 
of a shared assumption amongst committee particip ants that the constitutional 
protections accorded by s.  35(1) were intended to apply only to Aboriginal groups 
located in Canada, as reflected in their use of “in Canada” and “Canadian” 
synonymously with “of Canada”. Drafting history is relevant to constit utional 
interpretation ( R. v. Poulin , 2019 SCC 47, at para.  78; R. v. Stillman , 2019 SCC 40, at 
para.  77), and I see no reason to depart from this Court’s prior reliance on the Minutes 
in the instant case.  
[119]  This Court cannot impose an intention to broaden the constitutional 
protections under s.  35(1) beyond what was contemplated. If s.  35(1) was intended to  
 include within its purview Aboriginal groups located outside of Canada, then one 
would expect there to have been significant discussion and consideratio n of these 
broader issues of recognition and jurisdiction, including hearing from the communities 
outside of Canada about their interests. There is no evidence that any drafters or 
participants contemplated this novel constitutional measure, which belies a ny intention 
to include Aboriginal groups outside of Canada within s.  35(1)’s purview.   
[120]  As a result, I would find that “aboriginal peoples of Canada” under s.  35(1) 
are Aboriginal peoples who are located in Canada. In the present case, the Lakes Tribe 
is wholly located in Washington State in the United States of America, and therefore 
cannot be considered to be part of the “aboriginal peoples of Canada” under s.  35(1). 
As Mr.  Desautel is not a member of a collective that is part of the “aboriginal peoples 
of Canada”, he cannot exercise a constitutionally -protected Aboriginal right to hunt for 
ceremonial purposes in the traditional territory of the Sinixt in British Columbia.  
B. Failing to Adopt a Purposive Interpretation of Section  35 Leads to Implausible 
and Problematic Results  
[121]  The conclusion that the enactment of s.  35(1) did not constitutionalize 
Aboriginal rights held by collectives located outside of Canada is further bolstered by 
the deleterious consequences that would arise from the opposite conclusion.  My 
colleague is of the view that these concerns do not justify any change to the law because 
“[w]hile Aboriginal communities outside Canada can assert and hold s.  35(1) rights, it 
does not follow that their rights are the same as those of communities with in Canada”  
 (para.  71). With the greatest of respect, I cannot agree. If an Aboriginal group outside 
of Canada is entitled to exercise s.  35(1) Aboriginal rights in Canada, then it must have 
equal protection under the Constitution and be able to access and exercise a full panoply 
of rights in the same fashion as Aboriginal right holders within Canada. Nothing less 
would uphold the honour of the Crown and further Canada’s ongoing process of 
reconciliation with its first peoples.  
[122]  As such, extending the consti tutional protection of s.  35(1) to include 
Aboriginal groups located outside of Canada leads to some concerning outcomes. First, 
s. 35.1 of the Constitution Act, 1982 , uses the phrase “aboriginal peoples of Canada” 
in setting out an obligation to invite re presentatives of these groups to constitutional 
conferences, as did ss.  37 and 37.1 prior to their repeal (P.  W. Hogg, Constitutional 
Law of Canada  (5th ed. Supp. (loose -leaf), vol.  1, at pp.  28-65 to 28 -66). There is no 
reason in principle why Aboriginal groups holding s.  35(1) rights would be denied a 
constitutional right to democratic participation under s.  35.1 simply by virtue of their 
geographi cal location. While the lower courts were seemingly unconcerned by this 
prospect, in my view, it is contrary to the organizing constitutional principle of 
democracy and inconsistent with the purpose of patriation to allow Aboriginal groups 
located outside of Canada to participate in Canadian democracy as required by s.  35.1 
(Reference re Secession of Quebec ).  
[123]  Additionally, a multitude of challenges would arise with respect to the 
Crown’s duty to consult. The numbers of groups to consult and, where appropri ate,  
 accommodate would dramatically increase, and it can be anticipated that in some cases 
accommodating the interests of s.  35(1) rights holders outside of Canada would run 
counter to accommodating the interests of s.  35(1) rights holders within Canada. O nce 
an Aboriginal group outside of Canada has established a s.  35(1) right, one would 
assume that the Crown would be put on notice. As such, I cannot agree with my 
colleague’s view that “[b]ecause groups outside Canada are not implicated in this 
process to  the same degree, the scope of the Crown’s duty to consult with them, and 
the manner in which it is given effect, may differ” (para.  76). Aboriginal groups outside 
of Canada would in fact be implicated to the same degree, and thus the Crown’s duty 
to consu lt could not differ unless a two -tiered consultation process were established, 
which would run afoul of its obligation to engage in a “process of fair dealing and 
reconciliation” ( Haida  Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests) , 2004 SCC 73, 
[2004] 3 S.C.R. 511, at para.  32) with all Aboriginal rights holders.  
[124]  Given that the Aboriginal rights recognized and affirmed by s.  35(1) 
include not only site -specific rights but also rights to the land itself, finding that 
Aboriginal groups outside of Canada a re “aboriginal peoples of Canada” raises the 
possibility that these groups may, in principle, hold constitutionally protected 
Aboriginal title to Canadian lands. Aboriginal title confers on the group holding it “the 
exclusive right to decide how the land i s used and the right to benefit from those uses” 
(Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia , 2014 SCC 44, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 257, at 
para.  88). While this is not an issue raised directly in this case, it is by no means 
hypothetical. The CCT  — of which the Lakes Tribe is a member  — have already filed  
 two title claims in British Columbia courts (see Campbell v. British Columbia (Minister 
of Forest and Range) , 2011 BCSC 448, [2011] 3 C.N.L.R. 151). It would be a 
remarkable proposition that a foreign group could hold  constitutionally protected title 
to Canadian territory, as the required incidental mobility right would be fundamentally 
incompatible with Canadian sovereignty (see Mitchell , at paras.  159-64, per Binnie  J.).  
[125]  The drafters of s.  35(1) could not have inten ded these deleterious 
consequences to arise. As such, these concerns militate against the conclusion that the 
Lakes Tribe is part of the “aboriginal peoples of Canada”. I would therefore allow the 
appeal on that basis.  
C. Even If the Lakes Tribe Is Part of th e “Aboriginal Peoples of Canada”, 
Mr. Desautel Cannot Claim an Aboriginal Right to Hunt for Ceremonial 
Purposes  
[126]  Even assuming that the Lakes Tribe is part of the “aboriginal peoples of 
Canada”, as the majority concludes, I would nevertheless allow the appe al on the basis 
that Mr.  Desautel, as a member of the Lakes Tribe, cannot claim an Aboriginal right to 
hunt for ceremonial purposes within the traditional territory of the Sinixt in British 
Columbia. In my view, the Van der Peet test for an Aboriginal righ t under s.  35(1) is 
not satisfied in this case.  
[127]  I agree with my colleague that the test for Aboriginal rights for groups 
outside of Canada is the same as the test for groups within Canada. In accordance with 
the Van der Peet analysis, if an Aboriginal gro up outside of Canada can show that the  
 pre-contact practice, tradition or custom supporting the claimed modern right is integral 
to its distinctive pre -contact Aboriginal society, and that the right has a reasonable 
degree of continuity with the “integral”  pre-contact practice, tradition or custom, then 
the Aboriginal group must receive full recognition of its s.  35(1) rights ( Lax Kw’alaams 
Indian Band v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2011 SCC 56, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 535, at 
para.  46).  
[128]  However, in my view, the tr ial judge committed a reviewable error in her 
application of the Van der Peet test. In particular, she erred in finding that the continuity 
requirement of the test was met.  
(1) Continuity  
[129]  Section  35(1) protects only those present -day practices that have a 
reasonable degree of continuity with the practices that existed prior to contact ( Van der 
Peet, at paras.  63-65). Granted, as the Court stated in Van der Peet, the concept of 
continuity does not require an “unbroken chain of continuity” (para.  65, per 
Lamer  C.J.) or a “year -by-year chronicle of how the event has been exercised since 
time immemorial” (para.  249, per McLachlin  J., dissenting on other grounds). 
Continuity must be interpreted flexibly. Such flexibility, however, has its limits.  
[130]  As I see it, while temporal gaps in the actual practice do not necessarily 
preclude the establishment of an Aboriginal right ( Van der Peet , at para.  65), failing to 
tender sufficient evidence that the practice was maintained or, at least, that a connection  
 to the historical practice was maintained during such gaps may be fatal. Aboriginal 
rights claims require that proper and sufficient evidence be gathered and adduced to 
meet the legal requirements for such rights ( Ktunaxa Nation  v. British Columbia 
(Forests, Lands and Natur al Resource Operations) , 2017 SCC 54, [2017] 2 S. C.R. 386, 
at para.  84). 
(2) Application  
[131]  Turning to the appeal before us, it is important to review the findings of 
fact made by the trial judge. The trial judge found that the Sinixt had continued their 
seasonal  harvesting round in the northern part of their territory from the time of contact 
(1811) until around 1870. Around 1880 and 1890, the majority of the Lakes peoples 
moved to the Colville Reservation in Washington State. By 1902, only 21 Sinixt 
remained liv ing in their traditional territory in Canada when the federal government set 
aside a reserve for the “Arrow Lakes Band”, including Sinixt, Ktunaxa, and 
Secwepemc members. In 1956, after the last member of the Arrow Lakes Band died, 
the federal government d eclared the Band extinct.  
[132]  The record clearly shows that after 1930, the Lakes Tribe did not travel to 
or hunt in British Columbia. Today, the Lakes Tribe does not, as their ancestors did, 
“exercise a robust seasonal round in all of their traditional territ ory including those 
lands now in British Columbia” (para.  119). The only evidence proffered at trial about 
the Lakes Tribe’s presence in British Columbia at all before 2010 was a singular event 
in November 1972, when Charlie Quintasket, “a Lakes Indian fro m the Colville  
 reservation”, walked into the office of Aboriginal scholar Dr.  Dorothy  Kennedy and 
asked why the Lakes people had no Indian reserves in Canada (para.  49). The only 
evidence that the Lakes Tribe maintained a connection to the claimed right wa s the fact 
that “the land was not forgotten” (para.  50) in the minds of the Lakes Tribe members 
and that the Lakes Tribe engaged in the practice of hunting in Washington State at the 
time of contact.  
[133]  Mr. Desautel pointed to the creation of the internationa l border by the 1846 
Oregon Boundary Treaty and the outlawing of hunting by British Columbia through 
the Game Protection Amendment Act, 1896 , S.B.C., c.  22 (“ 1896 Act ”), to explain why 
the Lakes Tribe had gradually ceased hunting in the Sinixt traditional territory. The 
trial judge held that the Sinixt had continued to hunt in British Columbia up to the 
1930s despite the passing of the 1896 Act . Therefore, it cannot be said that the 1896 
Act prevented the Sinixt from hunting. But even if this is accepted to  be so, it does not 
explain the Lakes Tribe’s absence from the province for a period of almost 
30 years  — from 1982, when existing Aboriginal rights were elevated to constitutional 
status by the Constitution Act, 1982 , to 2010, when Mr. Desautel travelled to British 
Columbia for the purpose of shooting a cow -elk to launch this test case.  
[134]  Quite simply, there is no direct evidence between 1930 and 1982 and 
between 1982 and 2010 that the Lakes Tribe engaged in anything that could be 
considered a modern -day practice of hunting in this territory. This was not a case 
whereby the Lakes Tribe coul d not provide a “year -by-year chronicle of how the event  
 has been exercised since time immemorial”; rather, the Lakes Tribe did not hunt, let 
alone exercise a seasonal round, in British Columbia after 1930.  
[135]  I am of the view that the trial judge made a leg al error in concluding that 
the chain of continuity had not been broken and that Mr.  Desautel had established an 
Aboriginal right to hunt in British Columbia. While the trial judge’s findings of fact 
are owed deference because the weighing of evidence in a n Aboriginal rights claim is 
“generally the domain of the trial judge, who is best situated to assess the evidence as 
it is presented” ( Mitchell , at para.  36), the facts as she found them do not meet the 
continuity requirement necessary to establish  an Abo riginal right.  
[136]  Continuity cannot be established simply because there is evidence that “the 
land was not forgotten” in the minds of the Lakes Tribe members. This is not, and 
cannot be, the standard. Even if the fact  that the Lakes Tribe engaged in some hun ting 
practices in Washington State is considered, the evidence is inconclusive . Further, 
without an explanation as to its meaning, the evidence that Mr. Quintasket  asked 
Dr. Kennedy about Lakes Tribe reserves in Canada simply has no legal significance or 
relevance. Given that the  evidence of continuity is amorphous and imprecise in many 
respects, there was no basis upon which the trial judge could have drawn an inference 
of continuity. As the Court explained in Mitchell , at para.  39:  
There is a boundary th at must not be crossed between a sensitive 
application and a complete abandonment of the rules of evidence. As 
Binnie  J. observed in the context of treaty rights, “[g]enerous rules of 
interpretation should not be confused with a vague sense of after -the-fact 
largesse” ( R. v. Marshall , [1999] 3 S.C.R. 456 , at para.  14). In particular,  
 the Van der Peet  approach does not operate to amplify the cogency of 
evidence adduced in support of an aboriginal claim. Evidence advanced in 
support of aboriginal claims, like  the evidence offered in any case, can run 
the gamut of cogency from the highly compelling to the highly dubious. 
Claims must still be established on the basis of persuasive evidence 
demonstrating their validity on the balance of probabilities. Placing “du e 
weight” on the aboriginal perspective, or ensuring its supporting evidence 
an “equal footing” with more familiar forms of evidence, means precisely 
what these phrases suggest: equal  and due treatment. While the evidence 
presented by aboriginal claimants should not be undervalued “simply 
because that evidence does not conform precisely with the evidentiary 
standards that would be applied in, for example, a private law torts case” 
(Van der Peet , supra , at para.  68), neither should it be artificially strained 
to carry more weight than it can reasonably support. If this is an obvious 
proposition, it must nonetheless be stated. [Emphasis in original; text in 
brackets in original.]  
[137]  Given the Lakes Tribe’s lengthy and unaccounted -for absence from 
British  Columbia between 1930 and 2010, continuity is not made out. A single shot 
cannot create the Lakes Tribe’s modern exercise of the right. In the absence of even 
minimally cogent evidence, this conclusion seems inescapable.  
[138]  Therefore, even if the Lakes Tribe were found to be part of the “aboriginal 
peoples of Canada”, the lack of continuity would be fatal to Mr.  Desautel’s claim for a 
constitutionally -protected s.  35(1) Aboriginal right to hunt for ceremonial purposes in 
the Lakes Tribe’s traditional territory  in British Columbia. I would allow the appeal on 
this alternative basis as well.  
D. Common Law Aboriginal Rights   
 [139]  It is well established that “s.  35(1) did not create the legal doctrine of 
aboriginal rights; aboriginal rights existed and were recognized under  the common law” 
(Van der Peet , at para.  28), subject to the exceptions of sovereign incompatibility, 
surrender, and extinguishment ( Mitchell , at para.  10). However, this Court has not 
previously considered the effect of s.  35(1) on the common law rights o f an Aboriginal 
group located outside of Canada. Until now, this Court has only ever considered 
s. 35(1) in relation to claimants who were indisputably “aboriginal peoples of Canada”.  
[140]  The above reasons should not be taken as meaning that an Aboriginal 
collective located outside of Canada that is found not to be part of the “aboriginal 
peoples of Canada”, such as the Lakes Tribe, is foreclosed from establishing common 
law Aboriginal rights in Canada. However, I find it unnecessary to decide this issue in 
this case. Mr.  Desautel did not assert that he had a common law Aboriginal right to 
hunt. Indeed, he resisted this notion for a number of reasons, one being that a common 
law right would not have exempted him from the Wildlife Act  provisions at issue. 
Theref ore, I consider it unnecessary to determine whether Mr.  Desautel holds a 
common law Aboriginal right to hunt in British Columbia, and I leave the question of 
whether the common law continues to protect Aboriginal rights not constitutionalized 
by the enactm ent of s.  35(1) for another day.  
IV. Conclusion  
[141]  In summary, I would find that the expression “aboriginal peoples of 
Canada” in s.  35(1) means present -day Aboriginal peoples who are located in Canada,  
 and I would allow the appeal for that reason. But even if t his was not the case, 
Mr. Desautel cannot establish that he was exercising a s.  35(1) Aboriginal right to hunt 
in the Sinixt traditional territory in British Columbia, as he has failed to establish 
reasonable continuity between the pre -contact practice, cu stom or tradition and the 
contemporary claim. I would therefore allow the appeal on this alternative basis as well.  
[142]  I would allow the Crown’s appeal and answer the constitutional question 
in the negative. As a result, Mr.  Desautel should not be exempt fro m the Wildlife Act  
provisions under which he was charged. I would enter a verdict of guilty on both counts 
of hunting without a licence contrary to s.  11(1) of the Act and hunting big game while 
not being a resident contrary to s.  47(a) of the Act, and rem it the matter to the trial court 
for sentencing.  
 