 PART S I and II – OVERVIEW AND QUESTIONS IN ISSUE  
1. Nuchatlaht takes the following positions:  
a. After the date of sovereignty, aboriginal rights cannot be lost by reason of 
abandonment.  
b. The enactment of section 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982  did not “ elevate ” 
Proclamation rights to constitutional status ; rather, it  affirmed  their existing 
constitutional or quasi -constitutional status . 
c. The Appellant is  statute -barred from advancing an argument that an Indigenous 
group’s rights should be recognized merely at common law without receiving 
constitutional protection,  by operation of section 3 of the Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples Act , SBC 2019, c. 44 . 
PART III – ARGUMENT  
A. The Court Should Reject the Doctrine of Abandonment .   
i. Alberta’s argument concerning continuity amounts to an abandonment 
argument  
2. Nuchatlaht is concerned by an argument advanced by intervener Alberta.  Alberta seeks 
to import a “geographic continuity” requirement into the Van der Peet  test.  Alberta says that 
because the Lakes Tribe does not have an ongoing presence in BC, it cannot have an aboriginal 
right to hunt there.1  Effectively , Alberta is saying that when an Indigenous group departs from 
its traditional  territories, any rights that it may have in that area are  abandoned . 
3. There has been some judicial commentary on whether aboriginal rights can be 
abandoned, but this Court has yet to squarely address the topic.  In the Delgamuukw  trial 
decision, McEachern CJ accepted in principle that aboriginal rights could be abandoned through 
disuse, though he expressed strong reservations and stressed that courts should be slow to draw 
that conclusion.2  On appeal to the BC Court of Appeal, Lambert JA commented in obiter  that he 
did not believe that  there was any theoretical basis for the view that aboriginal rights could be 
1 Alberta’s factum at paras 73 and 76 -78. 
2 Delgamuukw v. British Columbia , 1991 CanLII 2372 (BCSC), at pages 798 -803 and 824 -826 
1abandoned, at least not after the date of Crown sovereignty.3  Lambert JA restated this view in 
his dissenting opinion in Gladstone  (BCCA) .4  The other justices did not address t he issue.  
4. Nuchatlaht submits that as Alb erta has raised abandonment, this Court should now clarify 
the law.  The concept of abandonment of aboriginal rights is contrary to both the common law 
and Indigenous perspectives, and has no place in modern s. 35(1) jurisprudence.  
ii. Alberta’s abandonment argument misconstrues the “continuity” component 
of the Van der Peet  test 
5. At para. 7 6 of its factum, Alberta characterizes the continuity component of the Van der 
Peet test in the following way: “Both the Van der Peet and Powley decisions include continuity 
as a requirement. This acknowledges that, over time, certain practices, customs or traditions may 
no longer be integral to the collective .” [Emphasis added]  
6. Alberta’s position fundamentally misconstrues the mean ing and function of continuity in 
the Van der Peet test.  Lamer CJ originally expressed the continuity requirement as follows:  
Where an aboriginal community can demonstrate that a particular practice, custom or 
tradition is integral to its distinctive cult ure today, and that this practice, custom or 
tradition has continuity with the practices, customs and traditions of pre -contact times, that 
community will have demonstrated that the practice, custom or tradition is an aboriginal 
right for the purposes of s . 35(1).5 
7. Lamer CJ also says that a key function of the continuity requirement is to permit a 
flexible approach that allows for evolution over time, avoiding a “frozen rights” approach.  
8. The Van der Peet  test could be described as “backwards -looking” – it begins with the 
modern practice that is said to be a protected aboriginal right, and looks backwards to see 
whether it can be connected to an ancestr al (pre -contact) practice, such that it could be said to 
constitute a modern continuation or evolution of that ancestral practice.  Another way of saying 
this is that the “continuity” requirement in Van der Peet  means that the modern practice that is 
said to be an aboriginal right must in some sense be a continuation  of an ancestral practice.  It 
does not mean that the practice must have been carried on continuously  since contact.  
3 Delgamuukw v. British Columbia, 1993 CanLII 4516 (BCCA), at paras. 850 -852 
4 R. v. Gladstone , 1993 CanLII 4520 (BCCA), at para . 76 
5 R. v. Van der Peet , 1996 CanLII 216 (SCC), at para. 64.  
29. Abandonment, by contrast, is premised on a “forward -looking” approach whereby one 
begins with the ancestral practice, and then looks forward in time to see whether continuity was 
broken at any point by the Indigenous group ceasing the practice or leaving its territory.  On this 
approach, an aboriginal right comes into being at contact and persists up until the “date of 
discontinuity,” whereupon it is “abandoned” and vanishes forever.  
10. This approach is inconsistent with – indeed, almost an inversion of – the test as set out in 
Van der Peet .  Lamer CJ expressly took no position on how the disappearance of a practice, 
custom or tradition would affect an aboriginal claim.  He expressly stated that an unbroken chain 
of continuity is not required, and that an Indigenous group could cease to engage in a practice 
and then resume it at a later date without precluding the establishment of an aboriginal right.6 
11. The notion that First Nations can cease and then resume the practice that grounds an 
aboriginal right is entirely consistent with the “backwards -looking” approach to co ntinuity, 
whereby the court is attempting to determine whether the claimed modern -day right is a  
continuation of the ancestral practice.  If, on the other hand, one takes the abandonment view – 
that the practice must be carried on continuously  lest it be a bandoned – then this becomes, at 
best, a rather murky and ambiguous exception.  How is a court to determine at what point a 
practice has been abandoned, as opposed to simply suspended?  The two situations are apt to 
look very similar up until the date the practice is resumed.  
12. In summary, the continuity requirement does not mean that aboriginal rights begin at 
contact and persist only until a discontinuity occurs.  Rather, it requires that the modern practice 
which is said to  be an aboriginal right can be shown to be a continuation of an ancestral practice.  
This does not require the demonstration of  continuous occupation of the geographic locus  of the 
claimed right  – if an Indigenous group leaves (or is displaced from) an area and then later seeks 
to resume activities in that area, this is entirely consistent with the Van der Peet  test.  Indeed, it 
would be perverse to suggest that an Indigenous group has abandoned a site -specific aboriginal 
right, when the very thing that brings it before the court is its attempt to resume the associated 
practice on that very site .  The doctrine of abandonment is premised on a misunderstanding of 
the role of continuity in the Van der Peet  test, and should be rejected by this Court.  
6 R. v. Van der Peet , 1996 CanLII 216 (SCC), at paras. 63 and 65.  
3iii. Abandonment raises further issues for aboriginal title claims  
13. Although aboriginal title is not in iss ue in the present case, acceding to a doctrine of 
abandonment could have serious implications for aboriginal title claims.  
14. Once an Indigenous group has established that its ancestors  held aboriginal title to land at 
the date of sovereignty then, subject to any evidence of subsequent surrender or extinguishment, 
that should end of the inquiry.  Endorsing  the doctrine of abandonment would put Indigenous 
groups in the po sition of proving not only that they had title at the date of sovereignty, but also 
that they did not subsequently “lose” it at any time between that date and the present.  That is not 
the test for aboriginal title as articulated in Delgamuukw  and Tsilhqot’in , and it would place an 
unreasonable evidentia ry burden on Indigenous groups seeking to have their title recognized.   
15. Even if the onus is placed on the Crown to prove abandonment, the Crown would still be 
in a position to demand disclosure of any and all documents pertaining to the use of the title 
lands between the date of sovereignty and the present, on the basis that it cannot determine 
whether there has been abandonment until it sees all evidence of use.  This is not a hypothetical 
concern – in Nuchatlaht’s aboriginal title claim befor e the BC Supreme Court, the Appellant 
British Columbia has taken precisely this approach.  This Court should therefore be live to the 
potential impacts on aboriginal title claims as it considers Alberta’s argument that “there must be 
some pattern of use an d presence in the area – both historically and in the present”.  
16. In addition to these pragmatic concerns, Nuchatlaht also submits that this Court should 
firmly reject the doctrine of abandonment in the aboriginal title context as a matter of law.  
17. Although a boriginal title is a type of aboriginal right, the legal test is different and is 
concerned with whether, as of the date of Crown sovereignty (generally taken to be 1846), the 
Indigenous group exclusively occupied the claimed territory.  The focus is there fore on 1846’s  
state of affairs in 1846, not today ’s.  So long as the claimant group exercised the necessary 
exclusive occupation, their title is said to have “crystallized” at the date of Crown sovereignty.7 
18. The concept of continuity arises in the test for aboriginal title in at least three different 
senses.  First, there is “continuity of community” – the claimant group must establish that they 
are the proper rights -bearing descendants of the group said to ha ve exercised exclusive 
7 Delgamuukw v. British Columbia , 1997 CanLII 302 (SCC), at para. 145.  
4occupation at the date of sovereignty.  Second, there is “continuity of occupation” – optionally , a 
claimant group may use evidence of present occupation of the claim area to support an inference 
that it exclusively occupied that are a in 1846.  A claimant group relying on this argument must 
also show continuity between their occupation of the area in 1846 and their occupation today.  
This is an optional mode of proof, not a requirement, and an Indigenous group may seek to prove 
exclus ive occupation in 1846 directly without invoking continuity of occupation.8 
19. The third sense in which continuity arises in aboriginal title is the concept of an 
Indigenous group maintaining a “substantial connection” to the land.  Per Van der Peet , the 
practice, custom or tradition that grounds an aboriginal right must be “integral to the distinctive 
culture of the claimant group”.  Lamer CJ affirmed in Delgamuukw this requirement was also 
part of the test for aboriginal title.  However, he added that in practical terms, this requirement 
could be presumed to be met in title cases because : 
“it would seem clear that any land that was occupied pre -sovereignty, and which the parties 
have maintained a substantial connection with since then , is suf ficiently important to be of 
central significance to the culture of the claimants.  As a result, I do not think it is 
necessary to include explicitly this element as part of the test for aboriginal title.”9 
20. This Court has never  impose d a positive obligation on Indigenous groups to demonstrate 
that they have maintained a substantial connection to claimed title lands after 1846.  At para. 
142, Lamer CJ states that in the test for aboriginal title, “the requirement that the land be integral  
to the distinctive culture of the claimants is subsumed by the requirement of occupancy”, which 
suggests  that only exclusive occupancy at the date of sovereignty need be proven, and there is no 
need to separately demonstrate the maintenance of a substanti al connection to the land (unless 
relying on the optional proof based on present -day occupancy).   
21. This issue  was noted and commented on by Cromwell JA in Marshall (NSCA) : 
I find it difficult to reconcile this statement with the earlier one to  the effect that, in title 
cases, the “integral to the distinctive culture test” is “... subsumed by the requirement of 
occupancy ...” (para. 142).  In one case, occupancy at sovereignty is enough, whereas in 
the other, occupancy plus ongoing substantial c onnection is required.  Moreover, any 
requirement for ongoing substantial connection with the land seems at odds with the 
purpose of s. 35(1) because insisting on post -sovereignty continuity would tend to “... 
8 Delgamuukw v. British Columbia , 1997 CanLII 302 (SCC), at paras. 152 -153 
9 Delgamuukw v. British Columbia , 1997 CanLII 302, at para. 151  [emphasis added] . 
5perpetuat[e] the historical injustice suffered  by aboriginal peoples at the hands of 
colonizers who failed to respect aboriginal rights to land”: para. 153.10 
22. Cromwell JA then consider ed the subject at length before finally concluding that 
“continuity of occupation from sovereignty to the present is not part of the test for aboriginal title 
if exclusive occupation at sovereignty is established by direct evidence of occupation before and 
at the time of sovereignty.”11  This reasoning is sound and should be re-affirmed by this Court.   
23. In any case, Nuchatlaht  submits that once title ‘crystallizes’ at the date of sovereignty, it 
is no longer subject to loss or abandonment due to a lack of presence on the land.  This is 
consistent with  the common law view of title, which recognizes that a person with adequate 
possession for title may choose to use it intermittently or sporadically.12 
iv. Abandonment is contrary to the Indigenous perspective  
24. The notion that by leaving its traditional territory, an Indigenous group abandons its site -
specific aboriginal rights is also inconsistent with the Indigenous perspective, because it assumes 
that Indigenous groups  can abandon their cultural identities as peoples closely connected to their 
traditional territories.  
25. Connection to traditional territory is central to Indigenous identity.  The Royal 
Commission on Aboriginal Peoples  (“RCAP”)  noted that “[l]and is absolutely fundamental to 
Aboriginal identity” and “is reflected in the language, culture and spiritual values of all 
Aboriginal peoples.”13  The Inter -American Court of Human Rights also notes that “the close tie s 
of indigenous people with the land must be recognized and understood as the fundamental basis 
of their cultures, their spiritual life, their integrity, and their economic survival.”14 
26. Unlike the immutable connection between traditional territory and Indigenous identity, 
the location of modern -day residence is often a function of colonialism and unconnected to 
10 R. v. Marshall , 2003 NSCA 105, at para. 164  
11 R. v. Marshall , 2003 NSCA 105, at paras. 157 -181 
12 R. v. Marshall; R. v. Bernard , 2005 SCC 43, para. 54, citing with approval Keefer v. Arillotta  
(1976), 1976 CanLII 571 (ONCA).  
13 Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal 
Peoples, Volume 2 – Restructuring the Relationship , (Ottawa: Supply and  Services, 1996) 
Chapter 4, p. 417  [RCAP Report].  
14 The Mayagna (Suom) Awas Tingni Community v Nicaragua , Inter -Am Ct. H.R., (Ser. C) No. 
79 (2001), para 149.  
6Indigenous identity.  RCAP  described how colonialism had a  profound impact on Indigenous 
populations by displacing them physically from their lands.  It noted that the Indian Act  likewise 
resulted in legislated dispossession of traditional territories whereby Indigenous peoples lost 
control of their own lands and  resources.15   RCAP  also observed that “Aboriginal peoples have 
had great difficulty preserving a home in what has always been their country” and in 
“maintaining their lands and livelihoods in the face of massive encroachment.”16 
27. Acceding to an argument that site -specific rights are abandoned through a change in 
residence presume s that displaced Indigenous groups  have entirely lost their connection to their 
traditional territories, and thus fundamentally altered their identitie s.  This is contrary to the 
Indigenous perspective and, especially where displacement was partly or wholly involuntary, 
“perpetuat[e s] the historical injustice suffered by aboriginal peoples at the hands of colonizers 
who failed to respect aboriginal  rights to land”,17 as this Court cautioned against in Delgamuukw . 
B. Section 35(1) Did Not “Elevate” Proclamation Rights to Constitutional Status; It 
Affirmed Their Constitutional Status.  
28. The Appellant , at paragraph 39 of its factum,  argues  that prior to 1982, aboriginal rights 
existed as common law rights, but were elevated to constitutional status by the enactment of s. 35 
of the Constitution Act, 1982 .  At paragraphs 82 -84 of its factum, the Appellant refers 
extensively to the 1980 hearings of the Joint Committee of the Senate and House of Commons.   
Nuchatlaht disagrees with the Appellant’s characterization of what transpired at , and subsequent 
to, those meetings , and with i ts view that aboriginal rights , at least those deri ving from the Royal 
Proclamation of 1763,  were not constitutionally protected prior to 1982.  
29. Nuchatlaht, through its umbrella organization the Nuu -chah-nulth Tribal Council , 
appeared, gave evidence, and made representations at the Joint Committee hearings .  At those 
hearings, the Nuu -chah -nulth people argued that the entire purpose of the  new Constitution’s  
proposed aboriginal rights clause was to preserve  the existing  constitutional status of aboriginal 
rights , particularly those rights derived from the Royal Proclamation of 1763 .  The Nuu -chah -
nulth people argued that Proclamation rights were already constitutionally protected, advanc ing 
15 RCAP Report, Volume 1, Chapter 6, p. 132  
16 RCAP Report, Volume 2, Chapter 4, pp. 417 -418 
17 Delgamuukw v. British Columbia , 1997 CanLII 302 (SCC), at para. 153  
7the need for a clause such as s . 35 to ensure that existing rights would not be demoted from 
constitutional status  due to the new Constitution ’s failure to mention them . 
30. On December 16, 1980, legal counsel for the Nuu -chah -nulth Tribal Council made the 
following comments to the Joint Committee:  
At the heart of the natives’ submissions is the idea that native rights are already a part of 
the constitution of Canada and that this status quo  will be upset by the introduction of a 
new document which makes no explicit entrenchment of those rights.  That is the point, the 
fundamental point we wish to make .18 
31. At the Joint Committee  hearings  the Nuu -chah -nulth were responding to early drafts of 
the Constitution that included a Schedule, similar to what eventually became "Schedule to the 
Constitution Act, 1982  Modernization of the Constitution." Then, as now, the Schedule did not 
include the Royal Proclamation of 1763.19 The Nuu -chah -nulth submissions to the Joint 
Committee were directed at  the principle  of inclusio unius est exclusio alterius . The concern was 
that by not including the Royal Proclamation in the Schedule, the constitutional status of 
Proclamation rights would be lost - in effect, demoted to being merely common law rights.  
32. The problem the Nuu -chah -nulth addressed at the Joint Committee was solved i n three 
ways: Firstly, the word "includes" is found in s . 52(2) of the Constitution Act, 1982 , indicating 
that the Schedule is not exhaustive. Secondly, s . 35 was added, making it crystal clear that the 
existing constitutional protections for aboriginal rights and title would be continued  – 
“affirmed” .  Thirdly, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 was explicitly mentioned in s . 25(a).  
33. In Delgamuukw  and later in Mitchell , this Court appeared to accept that s. 35(1) 
“constitutionalized” or “elevated to constitutional status” aboriginal rights which had not 
previously enjoyed that protection.20  Respectfully, this was not the shared understanding of the 
parties at the Joint Committee in 1980, and is in fact an incorrect understanding of the nature of 
Proclamation  rights prior to 1982 , and of the reasons why s . 35 was added .  Nuchat laht says now, 
18 Canada, Parliament, Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence of the Special Joint Committee o f 
the Senate and of the House of Commons on the Constitution of Canada,  32nd Parl, 1st Sess, No 
27 (16 December 1980) at 129 (Submissions by Jack Woodward).  
19 Constitution Act, 1982 , Schedule B to the Canada Act 1982 (UK), 1982, c 11, Schedule to the 
Const itution Act 1982: Modernization of the Constitution.  
20 Delgamuukw v. British Columbia , 1997 CanLII 302 (SCC), at para. 136; Mitchell v. MNR , 
2001 SCC 33, at para. 11  
8as it did then, that Proclamation  rights , at least,  were already a part of the Constitution prior to 
1982, and did not suddenly become constitutional rights as of that date.  Nor were any aboriginal 
rights excluded and thereby “demoted” to mere common law rights as of 1982.  
34. Nuchatlaht is concerned that the doctrine the Appellant advances will set a dangerous 
precedent.  If only some, but not all, of the pre -1982 aboriginal rights were “promoted” to 
constitutional status in 1982, then perhaps there are other such categories.  It was precisely to 
prevent that possibility that the Nuu -chah -nulth Tribal Council appeared at the Joint Committee 
and argued for a clause confirming that Proclamation rights enjoy constitutional status.    
35. Finding  that there exist both constitutional and “merely” common law aboriginal rights 
risks the  inappropriate erosion of s. 35 rights.  This is not an academic concern .  Nuchatlaht is 
currently advancing a n aboriginal title  claim  before the B C Supreme Court.  In that case, British 
Columbia , the Appellant in  this appeal , argue s that Aboriginal title  was at some point in time 
voluntarily abandoned .  Such an argument would have been inconsistent with rights derived from 
the Royal Proclamation of 1763 prior to 1982.  
C. British Columbia is Statute -Barred From Advancing its Argument Concerning 
“Merely” Common Law Aboriginal Rights  
36. On November 28, 2019, the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples  Act, S.B.C. 
2019, c. 44, came into force.  Pursuant to section 3, the BC government “must take all measures 
necessary to ensure the laws of British Columbia are consistent with [the United Nations 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples]”.  
37. Nuchatlaht takes the position that a  Crown pleading in a s. 35 rights case is a government 
“measure” within the meaning of the Act.  The Appellant is therefore statute -barred from 
advancing any argument in this court which would be inconsistent with UNDRIP.  
38. Article 26 of UNDRIP  confirm s Indigenous  peoples ’ rights  to their lands and resources , 
specifically stipulat ing: “Indigenous peoples have the right to the lands, territories and resources 
which they have traditionally owned, occupied or otherwise used or acquired”, and requiring 
States to “give legal rec ognition and protection  to these lands, territories and resourc es.”21: 
21 United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples , GA Res 295 , UNGAOR , 
61st Sess (2007).  
910 
 
{00019726:1}   39. In its factum, the Appellant acknowledges that the Lakes Tribe may hold aboriginal rights 
in Canada, but submits that these rights should be treated as common law rights only , with no 
constitut ional protection.  This would create a class of aboriginal rights that are recognized but 
still subject to statutory abrogation.  The Appellant acknowledges at para s. 6 and 50  of its factum 
that a “mere” common law  hunting  right would not be exempt from th e provisions of the Wildlife 
Act.  The scheme proposed by the Appellant amounts to “legal recognition without  protection ” – 
the right is acknowledged, but is unprotected from statutory abrogation .  This pleading is 
inconsistent with Article 26 of UNDRIP, which requires that states give both “legal recognition 
and protection” to the lands, territories and resources traditionally owned, occupied or used by 
Indigenous peoples, “with due respect to th e customs, traditions and land tenure systems of the 
indigenous peoples concerned.”  Accordingly, the Appellant is statute -barred from pleading this 
argument by operation of section 3 of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Act.  
40. This Court must be informed when governments make promises to Indigenous peoples, 
such as the promise contained in the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Act , and to 
vigorously enforce such promises.  The alternative is to allow governments to be hypocritical, 
leading to disillusionment, and run ning counter to the project of reconciliation.   As Greckol JA 
recently wrote in her concurring decision in Fort McKay (ABCA) , “The honour of the Crown 
may not mandate that the parties agree to any one partic ular settlement, but it does require that 
the Crown keep promises  made during negotiations designed to protect treaty rights.”22  The Act 
is a promise to uphold UNDRIP ’s principles , and the  Appellant breaks that promise in its  factum.  
PART IV – COSTS  
41. Nuchatlaht seeks no order as to costs, and asks that no costs be ordered against it.  
ALL OF WHICH IS RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED on June 1 9, 2020  
