 I. OVERVIEW  
1. This appeal is not really about hunting rights. It is not about mobility rights. Like every other 
collision between Indigenous peoples and Canadian law, it is about the connection between 
the people and the land, and about the Crown’s w illingness to respec t it. 
2. Does a Sinixt man carry the bundle of his rights with him across an imaginary and recent line, never leaving Sinixt land? Were the rights and identity of the Sinixt people on the south 
side, including those Sinixt who were forced out of Canada, sudde nly transformed and 
reduced after the Crown, 250 years ago, unilaterally drew that  line?  
3. In the end, this is about belonging, and the right to belong. 
4. Belonging to one people, not a split, broken people arbitrarily divided by other peoples’ 
lines. Belonging to the clay you are made of, in ways generations of immigrants may never 
know.  
5. Reconcil iation, a word with multiple,  diffuse meanings, includes mutu al respect for the right 
of nations to continue to exist and evolve as nations. It includes respect for the right of 
Indigenous nations, peoples of habitat, people who never left, to belong to all their land, and 
of individual citizens of those nations to belong -  period. 
6. The Peskotomuhkati, like the Sinixt, belong to land and water on both sides of the border. 
Unlike the Sinixt, their treaty relationship with the Crown as a single nation began in 1725, 
when the Crown asserted its sovereignty over all their  land and all their people , and the 
United States of America and the border did not yet exist. From 1725 on, the treaties are 
about land and rights.  
7. Can the Crown honourably say that a nation with whom it has treaty relations about l and that 
is now in Canada is  only partly “an Aboriginal people of Canada,” and that the C rown will 
now fulfill the relationship with only  part of the people? T hat is what it is  telling the 
Peskotomuhkati.  
8. Can the Crown honourably say that the rights of a people who have neve r made a treaty, and 
whose reconciliation with the Crown’s assert ion of sovereignty is thus  much more 2 
 
  
 incomplete, have been abrogat ed by a unila teral prerogative act? T hat is what it is telling the 
Sinixt.  
9. In Canadian law, the prerogative act of creating a  border must respect and be compatible 
with Aboriginal and treaty rights, because the Crown’s prerogative is limited and informed, 
ab initio,  by the law of the land – which in Canada includes the laws of Indigenous nations. 
Those laws are not inconsistent with Canadian sovereignty: they are part  of Canadian 
sovereignty. The making of the border must be seen through that principled lens. 
10. In Canadian law, Crown obligations to another nation- state, inclu ding about  border s, are not 
superior to Crown obligations  to Indigenous nations. The latter are protected by the 
Constitution of Canada. They are part of the supreme law of Canada. The former are not. Respecting treaty relations means respecting the continued integrity and existence of 
Indigenous nations, especi ally where the treaties were made well before the creation of the 
border. That respect must also flow to Indigenous peoples with whom the Crown has not yet, and may never, conclude treaties.  
11. Canada’s history has been shaped by the many times the Crown reli ed on continuing treaty 
relations with Indigenous nations, many of whom ended up partly or completely outside 
Canada. Canada would not be here today if the Crown had not been able to call upon those 
alliances in its wars with France and the United States.  
12. These legal arguments are about the nature of the relationship, in Canadian law, between 
Indigenous nations and the Crown. The most basic duty is  respect for the right of a pe ople 
to remain a people. F or Indigenous peoples this means remaining a people of the land. 
Without that respect, all talk of reconciliation, in any form, is  still a discourse of assimilation 
and denial.  
Facts  
13. The Peskotomuhkati (Passamaquoddy) Nation is the Indigenous people of the watershed of Passamaquoddy Bay and the Skutik (St. Croix) River. There are three Peskotomuhkati 
communities, two in the present State of Maine in the United States, and one in New 3 
 
  
 Brunswick.1 The three communities are close, geographically, culturally, politically, and 
through shared families.2 They are and choose to be one people, one nation. Peskotomuhkati 
territory  lies in both Canada and the United States. The international boundary was finally 
decided by treaty in 1842.3  
14. The treaty relationship between the Peskotomuhkati and the Crown began in 1725. It has 
been reaffirmed and renewed several times since, most recently in 2016.4 It provides for 
peaceful coexistence of Peskotomuhkati society and its expansi ve use of the land with the 
Crown’s subjects and their more sedentary way of life. Pe skotomuhkati Aboriginal title is 
intact . The treaties were made before t he creation of the U .S., when the Crown asserted 
colonial sovere ignty over all the  territory, including the part that is now in Maine .  
15. The Peskotomuhkati Nation has engaged in comprehensive, treaty- based negotiations about 
Aboriginal and treaty rights, including issues of  land, waters, hunting and fishing rights, with 
the Government of Canada since 2017 and the Government of New Brunswick since 2018.5 
The Council of the Peskotomuhkati Nation at Skutik, the community on the Canadian side 
of the r iver, has taken the lead for t he Peskotomuhkati Nation in the negotiations.  
16. Though Canada acknowledges that the Peskotomuhkati have treaty and Aboriginal rights, it 
has only recently moved toward recognizing some of the people as “Indians” and the 
community in Canada as a “band” pursua nt to the Indian Act .6 
17. As a result of the l oss of key reserved lands and prosecutions for hunting and fishing, many 
Peskotomuhkati families were forced to move to Maine.7 The Peskotomuhkati experience 
mirrors that of the Sinixt.  Today, Peskotomuhkati language and culture are strongest in the 
two communities on the west (Ameri can) side of the river . The survival of the  language and 
culture  depends upon the people continuing to live as one nation.  
 
1 Affidavit of Hugh Akagi, sworn February 3, 2020 at para 6 [Akagi Affidavit].  
2 Ibid at para 7.  
3 Ibid at para 11.  
4 Ibid at paras 9 -10. 
5 Ibid at para 20.  
6 Ibid at paras 17- 19. 
7 Ibid at para 14.  4 
 
  
 18. For three centuries, the treaty relationship has been the path to reconcile the Crown’s 
assertion of sovereignty over the land and the continued existence of the Peskotomuhkati 
Nation, its laws and government. That r econciliation is threatened if  the Crown treats only 
some of the people of its treaty partner as holders of fundamental rights and title. Canada and New Brunswick have stated in  negotiations that in their view Peskotomuhkati people 
who do not reside in Canada are not part of “an Aboriginal people of Canada.”  
II. ISSUES  
i. What is the meaning of the term an “Aboriginal people of Canada” in s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982 of Canada? What do “people” and “of Canada” mean? 
ii. Is the prerogative, the authority by which the British Crown asserted its sovereignty over this land and  its peoples, by which it made and is negotiating treaties, and by which it 
negotiated a  boundary w ith th e United States , limited by the law of the land, including 
Indigenous laws?  
iii. Is the Crown’s responsibility to the people of its Indigenous treaty partners affected by a later creation of that  boundary, and is that responsibility different when the Indigenou s 
people do not yet have a treaty with the Crown about their land?  
III. ARGUMENT  
A. Aboriginal Peoples of Canada…  
19. Though the words of s. 35 suggest  that there are three “Aboriginal peoples” in Canada 
(Indian, Inuit and Métis),
8 Canada’s adhesion to the United Nations Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Pe oples confirms  that “people” is a political rather than  a racial term.9 
The term mirrors th e use of  “Nations or Tribes” in the Royal Proclamation of 1763, a 
constitutional document of Canada. There are many peoples , each with their own languages 
and laws . 
 
8 Constitution Act, 1982, being Schedule B to the Canada Act 1982 (UK), 1982, c 11, s 35(1).  
9 United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,  UN GA Res 295, UNGAOR, 61st Sess, Supp No 
49, UN Doc A/RES/61/295, 46 ILM 1013 (2007).  5 
 
  
 20. “Of Canada” refers to the connection between the peoples and the land. The words are not 
possessive: Canada, the political entity, does not own peoples. Nor does “of Canada” mean 
the same as “Canadian”: a long history of denial of citizenship eliminates that interpretation.  
21. The Attorney General of Québec argues that, to be an “Aboriginal people of Canada,” a people must be faisant partie de la société Canadienne dans son ensemble .
10 Canada has 
historically marginalized  Indigenous peoples, denying them citizenship, civil ri ghts, and land 
rights. T hey could not be come part of Canadian society without “enfranchising” and 
abandoning their identity. The argument  echoes  a policy  of assimilation that Canada has 
explicitly abandoned. Crown actions forced t he Sinixt, like many Peskotomuhkati, to 
beco me refug ees south of the border . They were deliberately excluded from Canada. Now 
Quebec asks the Court to use that exclusion to justify further denial  of their rights. Quebec’s 
position is inconsistent  with its own insistence on its difference from the rest of Canada.  
22. Canada made “Indians” citizens shortly before affirming the United Nations Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights. Article 15 of that Declaration states that no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of a nationality.
11 Denying Sinixt  or Peskotomuhkati individuals the 
same vital land rights as other citizens of their nations is in effect denial of nationality.  
23. Statutes affecting Indigenous peoples must be interpreted liberally and purposively and 
ambiguities resolved in their favour.12 Section 35 is fundamental: its interpretation in a 
manner that respects, protects and preserves  the peoples is elementary.  
B. The Prerogative  
24. The boundary between Canada and the United States was created by the 1783 Treaty of 
Paris. As a peace treaty, that Treaty was a prerogative act (unlike the later Jay Treaty in 1794, 
a treaty of friendship, commerce and navigation which required legislative ratification).13 
 
10 Factum of the Attorney General of Quebec, dated June 4, 2020 at para 19.  
11Universal Declaration of Human Rights , GA Res 217A (III), UNGAOR, 3rd Sess, Supp No 13, UN Doc A/810 
(1948) 71.  
12 Nowegejick v. The Queen , [1983] 1 SCR 29 at 36, 1983 CanLII 18 (SCC).  
13 Francis v. The Queen , [1956] SCR 618 at 625, 1956 CanLII 79 (SCC)  [Francis ]: “Assuming, then, a broader 
authority under the prerogative in negotiating a peace treaty, neither the causes nor the purposes of the 1794 treaty 
bring it within that category…in the case of a treaty not a peace treaty, the prerogative does  not extend”.  6 
 
  
 25. The creation of the international boundary was an exercise of the Crown’s prerogative 
authority. The Crown’s assertion of sovereignty was similarly a prerogative act. Treaties 
between the Crown and Indigenous nations, including the treaty relationship betw een the 
Crown and the Peskotomuhkati Nation, are also exercises of the prerogative authority, as is the common law’s incor poration of Aboriginal rights and title . Why should the 1783 Treaty 
of Paris take precedence over constitutionally protected rights, i ncluding other treaty rights? 
Surely reconciliation  resolves  this question, refuting the assumption that one kind of exercise 
of preroga tive authority aut omatically overrides  another . 
26. From the perspective of most Canadians, the Crown’s prerogative has been eroded to near -
irrelevance. To Indigenous  peoples, the prerogative is a crucial source of Crown authority, 
historic and present, to negotiate treaties, to reserve lands , or to create “bands.”
14  
27. The Crown’s prerogative authority is itself subject to limits, not only as gradually reduced 
by Parliament, but from its inception. In 2019, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom 
asked the Queen to prorogue Parliament -  a prerogative of the m onarch. T he Supreme Court 
of the United Kingdom decl ared the pr orogation void. The Court decided it had authority to 
limit the prerogative, and that the prerogative had been limited from the beginning:  
…political controversy did not deter the courts from holding, in the Case of 
Proclamations , (1611) 12 Co Rep 74, that an attempt to alter the law of the 
land by the use of the Crown’s prerogative powers was unlawful. The court concluded at p. 76 that “the King hath no prerogative but that which the law 
of the land allows him,” indicating that the limits of prerogative powers were 
set by law and were determined by the courts.
15 
28. “The law of the land,” which guides, shapes and limits Crown prerogative authority, includes  
the elements of British law – Anglo- Saxon, Welsh, Scottish – and  equity. It is a meaningful 
but not  yet deeply defined legal term.  
 
14 Ross River Dena First Nation Band v. Canada, 2002 SCC 54 at para 54, and at paras 3 and 4: “…the power to create 
reserves was originally based on the royal prer ogative. The power is thought to be part of the Crown’s prerogative to 
administer and dispose of public property including Crown lands…There is no doubt that a royal prerogative can be 
abolished or limited by clear and express statutory provision”; Howse v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2015 FC 1063 
at para 37; Wells v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2018 FC 483 at para 48.  
15 R on the application of Mille r v. The Prime Minister: Cherry and others v. Advocate General for Scotland , [2019] 
UKSC 41 at para 32.  7 
 
  
 29. Indigenous legal systems are part of the law in Canada. They have been , both since the arrival 
of the Crown, and long before there was a Canada.16  
30. More appropriately, they stand beside the common law , a separate but equally legitimate 
stream (as equity remains a distinct stream): 
The law in Canada has followed its own unique development reflecting the 
diverse historical nature of Canadian society. In addition to the common law 
and civil law, courts and governments, the latter through statutes and treaties, 
have recognized and utilized Indigenous law.17 
31. As part of the law of the land,18 they have guided, informed and limited the exercise of the 
Crown’s prerogative authority from the time of the British Crown’s assertion of 
sovereignty.19 The limits imposed on Crown prerogative by pre -existing Indigenous legal 
systems, a different “law of the land” from place to place an d nation to nation, compel  the 
reconciliation required by  Canada’s constitution.  
32. The Appellant has asserted that the use of the Crown’s prerogative power to set a boundary 
by treaty with  the United States can result in  a people with Aboriginal rights and title to land 
in Canada not being an “Aboriginal people of Canada,” despite their soci ety and its laws 
being part of the law of the land that pre -existed the making of the boundary and the assertion 
of sovereignty by the Crown, and despite that people’s  treaties with the Crown.  
 
16 Delgamuukw v. British Columbia, [1997] 3 SCR 1010 [Delgamuukw ] at para 159:  “The common law should develop 
to recognize aboriginal rights as they were recognized by either de f acto practice or by aboriginal systems of 
governance.” See also Delgamuukw  at para 133: “…aboriginal rights existed and were recognized under the common 
law”; R. v. Van der Peet , [1996] 2 SCR 507 at para 28: “Aboriginal governments gave the constitution [of Canada] its 
deepest and most resilient roots in Canadian soil”; Mitchell v. MNR , 2001 SCC 33 at para 129 [Mitchell].  
17 Henry v. Roseau River First Nation Government , 2017 FC 1038 at para 8.  
18 “Indigenous legal traditions are among Canada’s legal traditions. They form part of the law of the l and”: Pastion v. 
Dene Tha’ First Nation , 2018 FC 648 at para 8.  
19 Another prerogative constitutional document of Canada, the Royal Proclamation of 1763  distinguishes between 
“our loving Subjects” and “the Nations or Tribes of Indians with whom We are connected, and who li ve under Our 
Protection.” That is, Indians were not, at that time, considered subjects: George R, Proclamation, 7 October 1763 (3 
Geo III), reprinted in RSC 1985, App II, No 1.  That distinction continued: see the 1794 Treaty of Friendship, 
Commerce and Navigation (the Jay Treaty),  between Great Britain and the United States of America, signed 19 
November 1794, at Article III.  8 
 
  
 33. If being an “Aboriginal people of Canada” and not being resident in Canada infringes upon 
Canadian sovereignty,20 it is only inconsistent with the assertion of that sovereignty if it is 
not part of the law of the land. If it is part of that law, by being part of an Indigenous nation’s law, then it is part of Canadian sovereignty, rather than inconsistent with it.
21 
34. In Mitchell v. MNR , this  Court wondered whether it could recognize an Aboriginal right that  
was inconsistent with Canadian sovereignty.22 But that asserted sovereignty is itself limited 
by the need for reconciliation between Indigenous laws and the Crown’s laws, and the 
requirement of finding a path to their coexistence.  Binnie, J. suggested that there is, in 
Canada, “shared sovereignty” be tween the Crown and Indigenous peoples.23 This has 
integrity only if the Indigenous share  is meaningful rather than merely assimilated.  
35. The ongoing process of reconciliation, implemented through pragmatic negotiations, can 
address any security issues associated with  an Aboriginal right to enter Canada, much as 
negotiations between Canada, the United States and Mexico continue to resolve issues of citizens of the three countries moving about in an integrated North American economy. 
Compromises of sovere ignty are not necessarily incompatible with sovereignty. They are 
sometimes exercises of sovereignty.  
36. While the creation of the boundary between Canada and the United States in 1783 was a 
prerogative act,
24 it had its limits. It could not declare by implic ation that an Indigenous 
people no longer had rights to its land in Canada where part of that people now found itself living in the (new) United States. That would be an expropriation without consent or 
compensation.  It could not override the existence and (common law, now constitutionalized) 
rights of a people  whose pre -existence and laws the Crown was seeking to reconcile with its 
asserted sovereignty. That is not honourable, and it is not reconciliation. 
 
20 Frank v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2019 SCC 1. Canadian citizens have the right to vote regardless of their place 
of residence.  
21 See, for example, Ro:ri:wi:io v. Canada (Attorney General) , 2007 ONCA  100 at para 4: “We note that the appellant 
does not assert aboriginal title over the land. Such a claim would not challenge Canada’s sovereignty because 
aboriginal title exists within Canadian sovereignty”.  
22Mitchell, supra  note 16. 
23 Ibid at para 135.  
24 Francis , supra note 13. 9 
 
  
 37. British Columbia has asserted that the continued practice of Aboriginal rights by Sinixt 
people resident in what is now the U.S. should not be recognized in Canadian law because 
it is incompatible with Canadian sovereignty. But that sovereignty is limited ab initio  by the 
law of the land. In Sinixt land, the root of that limit is the pre -existence of Sinixt society: 
their continued existence (continuity is a key Aboriginal right) as a distinctive society of that land is what makes them “an Aboriginal people of Canada.”
25  
38. The Immigration and Refugee Prote ction Act  provides that an Indian registered pursuant to 
the Indian Act has the same right to enter Cana da as a Canadian citizen. R esidence and 
Canadian or U .S. citizenship are irrelevant to Indian status, or to the right to enter or be in 
the country.26  
C. Reconciling  
39. “Reconciliation” has several different meanings . Some of them are being misused in this 
case. We are not talking about the kind of reconciliation required after the crimes and abuses of the residential school system ,
27 nor about Indigenous peoples reconciling themselves to 
Crown sovereignty or control.28 The term addresses  the continuing contradiction of the 
Crown’s unilateral asserti on of sovereignty over  land and the nations who were already here, 
who had, and have, their own laws , governments and societies. One path to that reconciling 
has been creating treaty relationships.29 Another is an abiding right to consultation and 
accommodation.30 Another is good faith negotiations.31 Reconciling in this legal sense is a 
verb, not a noun, for it is not over. 
 
25 R. v. Côté , [1996] 3 SCR 139 at para 56.  
26 In the Matter of a Reference for Review of Registrar’s Decision, James David Jock, [1980] 2 CNLR 75.  As to 
citizenship, it is irrelevant to a status Indian’s right to enter and remain in Canada: Immigration and Refugee Protection 
Act, SC 2001 c. 27, s 19(1) .  
27 Canada (Attorney General) v. Fontaine,  2017 SCC 47.  
28 “The modern law of Aboriginal rights was intended to reconcile interests of the local inhabitants…to a change in 
sovereignty” Binnie, J. in Mitchell, supra  note 16 at para 144.  
29 Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests) , 2004 SCC 73 at para 20: “Treaties serve to reconcile pre-
existing Aboriginal sovereignty with assumed Crown sovereignty”.  
30 Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada , 2005 SCC 69 at para. 57: “Treaty 8 therefore gives rise to Mikisew procedural 
rights (e.g. consultation) as well as substantive rights (e.g. hunting, fishing and trapping rights).”  
31 Delgamuukw , supra  note 16 at para 207: “The best approach in these kinds of cases is a process of negotiation and 
reconciliation that properly considers the complex and com peting interests at stake”.  10 
 
  
 40. Unilateral Crown action is the antithesis of reconciliation.32 For the Crown to suddenly and 
unilaterally declare that part of a people who have a bundle of rights, especially where the 
people have treaty relations with the Crown, are now no longer entitled to those rights, by 
reason of residence (for both Canadian and U .S. citizen ship were withheld from Indians until 
the 20th century), is not honourable.  
41. Maintaining that Indigenous peoples “resident in the United States” have no rights or 
relations in or with Canada is dishonourable in another sense . The Crown has often relied 
upon its Indigenous all ies, protecting their rights in the 1794 Jay Treaty and 1815 Treaty of 
Ghent . It supported its Haudenosaunee allies in their dealing s wit h the U .S. after 1783. It 
actively supported and supplied Indigenous  resistance to the US  in the Ohio country in the 
early 1790s, keeping its posts south of the boundary. In the War of 1812, the Crown’s 
Indigenous allies on both sides of the boundary, including the Shawn ee, Lakota and 
Anishinaabeg, protected Canada from falling to American invaders. The Crown supported 
its Sauk and Fox allies in the Black Hawk War of 1832. The Crown has also historically 
insisted that the U .S. honour its obligations to Indigenous peoples resident in Canada . It took 
international action for  the Cayuga Nation in 1926.33 It is too late, with its  history of reliance 
on Indigenous help, for the Crown to assert that this boundary has been anything but porous.  
IV. SUBMISSIONS ON COSTS  
42. The Peskotomuhkati Nation does not seek costs and request s that none be awarded against it.   
V.  ORDER SOUGHT  
43. The Peskotomuhkati Nation requests permission to present oral argument not exceeding five  
(5) minutes at the hearing of this  appeal.  